---
title: ''
categories: []
tags: []
status: draft
type: post
published: false
meta: {}
---

Today is yet another one of those days where I had plans to be productive for
the night, but instead, I could only sit and stare blankly at my computer,
knowing that I want to say something but not knowing what exactly I want to
say. So I just sit, and stare. And at some point, I realize that some things
are not meant to be written in a perfectly crafted way. I don't have a thesis,
or an argument to present, just words I want to put down.

I am annoyed. I am annoyed that this blog that was originally meant for
science and lighthearted musings has turned into consecutive reflections about
tragedies in the world. I am annoyed that when I came here to find a draft I
had written about another black man who needlessly lost his life to the police
while selling a pack of cigarettes outside a convenience store almost a year
ago today, I could not find it. I am more annoyed that that memory was so
vivid that I even remembered that I had written a draft about that event. I am
annoyed that I don't have it in me to even watch the video of yet another
black man getting shot by a police officer while out on a drive with his
girlfriend and kid. I am really annoyed, having seen the news about 4 police
officers shot dead by two snipers in Dallas, that my first thought was, "I
hope those guys can get away..."

I am annoyed that I don't have a better vocabulary of words, and that instead
I will have to use sad, heartbroken, angry, and disgusted, yet again.

Kevin Durant joined the Warriors this week and I thought that would be the
biggest thing that stirred up reactions on the internet. I'm annoyed that that
wasn't - not by a long shot.

* * *

As I sat here blankly, I suddenly felt like I understood those politicians
that could only offer their thoughts and prayers: thoughts and prayers are the
only actionable outcomes when someone loses hope and the belief in that they
can make a change. The reason for that hopelessness probably differs from
person to person, though. For them, it's the impossible choice between
lobbying money that supports their family and career, and their responsibility
to their constituents. For us regular folks, it's probably more on the lines
of just not knowing what the fuck we can do as individuals. I read a tweet
that gave a very detailed outline of how to make sure your local politician
prioritize police reform, like sending them an email. I read it, then I closed
Twitter. I didn't send that email though.

