---
title: The neural correlate of everything.
categories: []
tags: []
status: draft
type: post
published: false
meta: {}
---

Does a platonic cognition exist?

Two physicists go to a bar after they finish watching the Disaster Artist. One
of them asks the other: "what did you think of the film?" The other replies:
"ah, James Franco's performance was simply electrifying, wouldn't you agree!"
The first nods in agreement: "electrifying, indeed. I do wonder how he and
Seth Rogen still manage to have the spark after all these years."

Next day in the lab, the two physicists begin their investigation of the
electron transfer properties between James Franco and Seth Rogen.

* * *

The goal of modern neuroscience, especially that of cognitive neuroscience, is
to characterize the biological basis of behavior and cognition. Meaning, how
does the (central, mostly) nervous system enable the various operations of
behaving organisms. A concrete question, for example, is "how do our brains
store the telephone number we're trying to hold in memory while being
bombarded with constant sensory input?" These are the kinds of questions that
neuroscientists are working towards on a daily basis today.

![Does the brain cause, or simply correlate with,
behavior?](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_5a00037871c10b5cf341c649_1509950333144_Screen+Shot+2017-11-05+at+10.37.58+PM.png.58+PM.png_)
Does the brain cause, or simply correlate with, behavior?

It used to be the case, not long ago, that "neural mechanisms" was the term of
choice, as you can see for the first half of the 20th century from the above
Google n-gram search. Since the mid 90s, however, it seems that we have begun
to acknowledge the shaky philosophical ground on which we stand by assuming
that what goes on in the nervous system **causes** behavior, and so we
effectively punt on this point by switching over to the term "neural
correlates" (though note that neural basis steadily rises since the 30s).
Being agnostic to whether the brain actually "causes" or only "mirrors"
behavior and cognition is not a big problem, as it still enables us to conduct
scientific experiments, and it is an essential part of understanding how we
(humans) do what we do.

Having legitimized "neural correlate" as a productive line of investigation,
for better or worse, we can now focus on finding ever-improving snapshots of
such neural correlates. Practically, that means we want to know exactly when
and where the brain does something in parallel with when a person or animal
does X, Y, or Z, and for that reason, neuroscience in the last few decades has
been developing better and better tools and analytical techniques to better
understand the brain tissue itself - things like connectivity and functional
imaging, as well as causal neural circuit manipulation. Some refer to this
trend as "neuro-chauvinism", as the neural and cellular half of the
investigation has been given a disproportionate amount of focus, and more
importantly, funding resources. Maybe this is because very few of us ever
actually see a brain or a brain cell, whereas all of us experience behavior in
ourselves and others, that we think the fatty blob to be more mysterious. Or
perhaps it spawns from the reductionist philosophy that understanding these
biological "atoms" - interconnected neural circuits - will necessarily lead to
our understanding of the whole: psychology reduces to biology, biology to
chemistry, and chemistry to physics, and we have some goddamn good math for
physics, so as long as we can mathematicize the underlying neurobiology like
we continue to do in characterizing the physical world around us, then
everything from consciousness to intelligence will be satisfactorily
explained.

**We're not brains in vats?**

I'm not at all ashamed to admit that I've held that view for a long time.
Surprising, I know. But I have to say, having been drinking the cognitive
science kool-aid for the last 3 years, I'm a little more convinced that maybe
spending time and funding resources on that second half of the "neural
correlate of XYZ" is very important as well: namely, detailing the behaviors
X, Y, and Z. This does not mean they are mutually exclusive, but there is only
so much research dollars to go around in reality. I won't bore you with the
details, but it turns out if you spend enough time with people who care a lot
about human and animal behaviors, some of that will rub off on you. This
newfound appreciation coincides with, and is also inspired by, a recent
resurgence of neuroscientists championing more in-depth characterization of
"behaviors" in studying the brain, which is nicely summarized and argued for
in [Krakauer et al., 2017](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28182904).

I highly recommend giving that paper a read if you're at all interested in
what neuroscience is trying to accomplish, as it is very accessible to a lay
audience, but the main argument boils down to this: understanding the neural
basis of behavior requires that we understand, to some extent, both the
nervous system and natural behaviors. This is not a new view, as it has been
detailed previously by
[Tinbergen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tinbergen%27s_four_questions), and
the entire fields of behavioral psychology and later, embodied cognition,
though I now realize that those might not come in the vanilla neuroscience
graduate curriculum. Those nights of slaving away on 80-page papers are
finally justified.

By "understanding", I roughly mean that we can construct a data-driven model
of how various elements relate to each other and the whole, like mapping out a
relational structure, or otherwise known as an ontology. I'm sure I'm
butchering the formal definition of the word, but a dictionary, for example,
maps out the ontology of words: how words are defined by other words, which
are in turn defined by networks of yet more words. A neuro-ontology, then,
might exist at the level of brain lobes, or cell types based on morphology or
gene expression, or both. Once we have good relational structures mapped out
of the brain and of natural behaviors independently, we could then start to
bridge the gap between the two by finding consistent correlates. The problem
is, as those authors argue in the above paper, that we currently have a poor
understanding of behavior and neuroscience is not doing much to improve that.
Without behavior, modern neuroscience essentially reduces to fiddling with
really cool toys. Another point they stress is studying "natural behavior":
sure, it is interesting to know that activating a certain subpopulation of
neurons will make you hallucinate a purple elephant riding a rainbow (nyancat
style), but is that ever an observed behavior in the wild, and to what extent
do we care about it if it is not?

![Krakauer et al., 2017 Fig. 1: brain in a dish is mapped to cat-mouse
silhouette.Â ](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_5a000ebd8e7b0f1f9faa3f93_1509953236135_Screen+Shot+2017-11-05+at+11.26.39+PM.png.39+PM.png_)
Krakauer et al., 2017 Fig. 1: brain in a dish is mapped to cat-mouse
silhouette.

**Turns out, our natural behavior is not sitting in front of a screen for
hours on end so that we can be rewarded with drops of suspicious
liquid...wait, it's not?**

So how is behavior studied in the typical neuroscience lab? Well, one word to
describe it is "constrained", as it necessarily is in order for us to tightly
control all other confounding variables a person (or animal) may experience
outside of our variable of interest. I have a weirdly conflicting feeling
about this paradigm: on the one hand, controlling for extraneous variables
closely follows the tradition of physics, where only by isolating the single
factor at play can we determine its relevance. On the other hand, those
"extraneous" variables are what non-neuroscientists may refer to as being
alive. Although, practically speaking, limiting degrees of freedom in the
behavior we try to study is essential because our recording rigs look like
these:

![](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_5a0159e3e4966b326128de3d_1510039276224_Screen+Shot+2017-11-06+at+10.57.32+PM.png.32+PM.png_)
![](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_5a0159ebe2c48324aee5714b_1510038001287_Screen+Shot+2017-11-06+at+10.58.00+PM.png.00+PM.png_)
![](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_5a0159ee24a6947cd53c2d94_1510038087805_Screen+Shot+2017-11-06+at+10.58.20+PM.png.20+PM.png_)

Just how limited are these lab behaviors? Conveniently enough, Surya Ganguli's
group just uploaded their ["task dimensionality"
paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2017/11/05/214262?%3Fcollection=)
(Gao et al., no relation) on bioRxiv this week, essentially making the case
that the behaviors we study in the lab are so simple that it's no surprise
that the corresponding neural measurements from just a few hundred neurons can
almost fully capture any variation in those behaviors (which, by the way, is
like a millionth of the total number of neurons we have). So for example, one
might be interested in motor control, so one would train a monkey (or
[WEIRD](http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2013/05/weird_psychology_social_science_researchers_rely_too_much_on_western_college.html)
undergraduates) to perform a very specific reaching task constrained in 2D
space, and voila, one would then find that a small group of neurons (or
voxels) in the motor cortex could reliably predict arm trajectory (position,
velocity, etc) up to a great degree of accuracy, even though that animal's
natural range of movement in free behavior is much wider.

One might argue that, again, this was by design: the careful neurophysiologist
does not rest UNTIL her experiment necessarily pinpoints a small number of
neurons as responsible for a particular behavior. I don't remember where I
heard this from, or how exactly it goes, but there is a quote that goes
something like: "a good experiment is one where we do not need statistics to
in analyzing the data". Probably spoken by a physicist. Holding back our
collective physics-envy, though, I think systems neuroscience as a whole has
started to move away from, or maybe exhausted the assumption that we can
understand behavior as a whole by studying tiny piecewise chunks of it in the
lab.

**Do we need a behavioral ontology?**

So where does that lead us? Well, a few recent papers have expanded on the
idea of **fully** characterizing behavior prior to, or maybe even independent
from, finding its neural correlate, and they rely on modern advances in
machine learning and computer vision to automatically label behavioral
categories - work that would otherwise take thousands of people-hours to
perform. See [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25277452) for a
philosophical perspective on this methodology (computational ethology), and
[here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28709004) for an absolute massive
empirical study that basically solves Drosphilia behavior (aptly titled:
_Mapping the Neural Substrates of Behavior_ ), and
[here](https://neuroecology.wordpress.com/2017/08/04/behavioral-
quantification-mapping-the-neural-substrates-of-behavior/) for a nice and
friendly exposition of the aforementioned study. To be perfectly clear, I
don't at all mean to imply that there wasn't detailed and comprehensive
behavioral work done prior to the last few years, as neuroscience has a
history of doing just that, possibly stemming from its roots in behavioral
psychology. All I'm trying to say is that I don't remember good behavioral
work ever being "cool", and even more rare is it mentioned in the same
sentence as other hot new things like "machine learning" and "big data", but
then again, I haven't really been around for that long...

> Behavior is the new opto.

>

> â Andrew Pruszynski (@andpru) [October 14,
2017](https://twitter.com/andpru/status/919191495562973184?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)

![Robie et al., 2017. Graphical
abstract](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_5a040e8871c10b1577cf030d_1510215334215_Screen+Shot+2017-11-09+at+12.14.45+AM.png.45+AM.png_)
Robie et al., 2017. Graphical abstract

As those researchers did with the fruitflies, we might try to do the same for
humans: observe every single human behavior possible, unsupervised and
unbiased, and then proceed to empirically separate them into discrete-ish
categories, from which point we can go and look for their corresponding neural
correlates confident in our knowledge of behavior. Let's assume, for a second,
that this was feasible and also not ethnically questionable, would we arrive
at similarly comprehensive findings as those above? I tend to think so,
because I think humans are not qualitatively different from fruitflies, at
least in the framework of ethology. Meaning, we might exhibit more complex
(and just more) behaviors than fruitflies, but all of that can be explicitly
captured just like that of flies, via visual, audio, and perhaps tactile
recordings. At this point, you're probably thinking: "hoooooold tf up - humans
are different from flies in a KEY way, and that's the ability to hold internal
thoughts without explicit action." Alas, we are foiled! This means even if we
were to record every single explicit action a person exhibits, we will still
never be able to access those private thoughts, and thus our picture of
"behavior" will necessarily be incomplete.

And that exact thought, after this long build up in the last few paragraphs,
is the bone I want to pick today.

