I know senior grad students are supposed to have been done with classes already, but I'm taking a Philosophy of Neuroscience class and it's already been fruitful after 1 week, this is how:

This week, we're reading Pat and Paul Churchland's article on intertheoretical reductionism: a neuroscientist's field guide. In essence...

I've long been a fan of eliminitivist materialism, which is the idea that (folk) psychological phenomena can be reduced to purely physical explanations a. Of course I am,

So in mymind, I've always thought psychology is the problem - it posits vaguely defined constructs which we study empirically, except people rarely agree to the definition of things in the first place, other than well-established operationalizations, otherwise known as "tasks". More annoyingly, neuroscientists are stuck with studying the same set of crappy phenonmena, but with the distinct pleasure of then performing extremely difficult technical feats, like patching 100 cells in-vivo.

After this week's readings, I'm starting to think psychology is not the problem, per se. I'm not out on bender against psychology altogether, but folk psychology. In fact, it's Neuroscience's fault for stretching itself.

Chemistry is fully explained by physics, but it remains a field of its own because physical chemists are interested in a completely different thing -or level - than physicists. Similarly, physicists have all the tools to "explain away" chemistry, but they don't, because most of them don't care. The small intersection of physical chemistry uses the tools of physics to better understand chemistry, and perhaps to create more interesting synthetic molecules.

Similarly, it's possible that neuroscience and psychology should study completely different things. Neuroscience is explicitly concerned with the biological aspects of the nervous system, and psychology with human and animal behavior. A "full" neuroscience study has always included good characterizaton of behavior,and (partially) the neural circuit underpinning it. But neuroscience is not in the business of characterizing complex animal behavior, or it shouldn't be, because there are tons of interesting things to study in the brain - physiology, molecules, dynamics - that have nothing to do with behavior of the entire organism. Yes, Nature, Science, and our indeflatable hubris would like a neural explanation of behavior, but that may be largely out of scope. I don't know if this take over of scope is a curse neuroscientists are forced to carry, or if it's our big neuroscientist and physicalist egos

So it's not that psychology sucks, it's that folk psychology sucks. This doesn't mean I'm absolving a term like "working memory" or "attention", because a lot of times, this are preconceived folk notions that are not based on any sort of carta blanche empirical evidence, or even a verbalized definition.

If a behavior is to be well characterized and expressable in a compact form (i.e. mathematically), it has to consider the ecological and cultural context driving it - be it for a mouse or for a human. It may even be the case that to differentiate different behaviors, we have to reach downwards for neural distinctions. But the success of psychology should rest on the milestone of fully mapping out a WHAT of behavior, and how they relate to each other - i.e. an ontology, like a periodic table of atomic elements, but for behavior. Like wise, neuroscience's first order of business is to characterize the WHAT of the nervous system - cell types, connectivity, dynamics. To map out the ontology of neural dynamics, we'll certainly reach down to chemistry and proteomics, and maybe up to see which behaviors explicitly "trigger" classes of neural dynamics. The intersectional space between the two is available and exciting, but I argue that we don't know either enough to start bridging these levels. Perhaps understanding the brain will give us a huge leap forward, like the case with newtonian physics and astronomy, but in many such instances, the higher level already has an useful (and usable) set of laws and theories. Psychology will always be in business because as humans, we are fascinated with ourselves and each other, maybe it's out of narcissism, maybe it's a genuine effort to deeply understand one another. Either way, the only hope is for neuroscience and pschology to inform folk psychology and how we talk about these things in a everyday sense. At the end of the day, it's what's useful that counts.

we're all in the business of stamp collecting - until enough stamps are collected, we can't really categorize them into any meaningful organization. 

A funny thought just occurred to me - the periodic table seen by a physicist is just a large grid with the same dots drawn different amount of times in each grid.
