---
title: 'Moving Forward.'
tags: [Reflection]
status: publish
type: post
published: true
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.2)
  #teaser: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg

excerpt: "And so, it is on this day- a day of ending and beginning in every sense, but a
day unceremoniously residing in its square on the calendar, preceded and
preceding thousands more- that I start the documentary that is my little blog
on my own website."
---
I wish I could come up with a better title for this very first piece, but I
have to settle for the compromise between giving it too much, and at the same
time, too little, importance. On the one hand, it marks the end of a
wonderfully agonizing and perpetually exhilarating journey that is my
undergraduate career in EngSci, having made countless memories with a handful
of _framily_ (at the lack of a better word for the loss of distinction between
friends and family, thanks Sprint Mobile). Not only that, it marks what every
undergraduate deems to be the beginning of "real life"- the interface between
excitement and fear, between finally being responsible for yourself and, gasp,
_being responsible_.

On the other hand, it is just another day. I fully acknowledge that I have a
need to take on this party-pooping persona that is half rational, half
critical, and half afraid of giving something too much meaning in case it
doesn't ever live up to my expectations.

And so, it is on this day- a day of ending and beginning in every sense, but a
day unceremoniously residing in its square on the calendar, preceded and
preceding thousands more- that I start the documentary that is my little blog
on my own website. I wondered whether writing my thoughts on the internet
would come to bite me in the back, whether be it for my professional or
personal relationships, maybe because I'm cussing too much or that I'm telling
a story or opinion that I wasn't really suppose to.

In the end, I can't say how that was resolved, but I just know that I am going
to do it. I'm going to dedicate time to myself, once every week, whether to
practice thinking, fleshing out an idea, documenting an event, or just
polishing my writing for the sake of writing.

Maybe I should have called it _Self-Titled._
