---
title: It's Getting Hot In Here
categories:
- Science
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta: {}
---

I hate hot weather. I hate it so much more than I hate when it's cold, because
even though I feel like the Michelin Man, being in the cold means that I can
always put on another layer. And if I really think about it, the reason why I
hate the cold is because when I'm warm enough to be comfortable outside, I'll
be burning hot inside. Don't get me wrong, I love a sunny day just as much as
the next guy. But forget about the raging infernos and the pits of fire, being
in a room that's 28+ Celsius with zero draft is pretty much hell for me. The
worst thing about the heat is not the physical discomfort, but rather, it's
the apparently debilitating effect it has on my cognitive functions, which
lead me to ask: what exactly it is about the heat that fucks up my day?

I can understand how general physical discomfort can piss off the brain enough
till it stop functioning. But instead of lumping this cause & effect, we can
be a bit more scientific about it and focus on the heat for the moment, and
consider a few explanations that are as orthogonal as possible. As always, I
assume that I'm not some alien life form on Earth and that other people
experience similar distaste for this suffocating heat.

Broadly speaking, we can look at how the heat gets to your head in two ways:
direct vs. indirect. By direct mechanism I am referring to the temperature
dependence of neurons and cell function in general, which should be rather
straightforward to study, such as the ionic equilibrium potential, governed by
the Nernst equation. There is probably a very fine temperature range, outside
of which abnormal cell states begin to manifest. However, this will most
likely turn out to have a minute effect, since the human body is so adept at
regulating its internal temperature. It should be noted here that this is
assuming that I am capable of normal thermoregulation, since in pathological
situations such as a high fever, even a few degrees can cause permanent brain
damage [1]. Interestingly, nerve conduction speed, which I will take as a
first order approximation for regular cognitive processes, sees an increase
proportional to temperature [2]. This means that to some degree, you might
actually be smarter and/or faster when it gets hot! Not really, but the point
of all of this is that this level of heat (< 40C) probably won't affect your
neurons all that much, and for the amount of heat that does get through, it
won't actually make you stupid on a cellular level.

Scratch that, [3] shows overall increased cognitive performance with slightly
increased body temperature, controlling for factors such as circadian rhythm,
hours awake, etc. I haven't gone into the details too much, one of my biggest
question being the effectiveness of their attempt to control for sleep. But
this is really starting to hurt my case either way.

The other possibility, then, is by ways of an indirect mechanism, perhaps a
side effect of the regular thermoregulation process. Speaking from my own
experience, aside from being incredibly slow, two of the more prevalent
effects of a hot day are irritability and lack of motivation, i.e. I become a
crank couch potato. A quick scan at literature reveals that this exact effect
has indeed been shown: [4] notes self-reported increase in irritability and
decrease in alertness, but curiously, also improved speeds at math calculation
and verbal reasoning, with a 2 degree Celsius increase in body temperature;
[5] notes increased preference for aggression-type activity, although this one
comes with a huge caveat, and frankly the experiment design itself is pretty
hilarious, so give that a read. Finally, [6] summarizes a few other studies,
looking at a positive correlation between warm temperature and mood, suicide,
and violent crimes.

All in all, what I've managed to learn through this little excursion is that
1) people hate hot and humid temperatures, 2) cognitive performance does not
actually suffer with increased temperature, and 3) this needs more research to
draw conclusive findings. In essence, it's all in my head. A few notes to
consider, however: first, the cognitive tasks performed in the studies are
usually straightforward and mechanical, i.e. calculations and reading
comprehension. This limits the proficiency findings to only a subset of tasks,
and not others, such as more open tasks like writing (I know I had a lot of
trouble finishing up this piece in this suddenly >25 C weather). Second,
motivation was essentially a non-issue in these tasks, because it isn't really
up to the participants to push themselves to do the task, unlike in real-life
situations at home or work. Third, I really need to get AC in the house.
Finally, although I didn't find a satisfactory answer, we can venture a guess
as to why both the laziness and the irritability come about: due to the
already high ambient temperature, the body probably wants no part in extra
movements that will generate even more body heat, thus reducing me to a
potato; and as for irritability, it might be a product of all the pent up
energy the body doesn't need to use for heating anymore.

Basically, I'm too hot to move, but already hot enough to be pissed.

_____

My citation formatting is really going out the window. Thank god for automatic
citation.

[1] Fever. MedlinePlus. Updated: May 16, 2014. Accessed: May 27, 2014.
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003090.htm  
[2] Matthew C. Kiernan et al. _Effects of temperature on the excitability
properties of human motor axons_. Brain (2001) 124 (4): 816-825
doi:10.1093/brain/124.4.816  
[3] Kenneth P. Wright et al. _Relationship between alertness, performance, and
body temperature in humans._ American Journal of Physiology - Regulatory,
Integrative and Comparative Physiology. Dec 2002,283(6)R1370-R1377;
DOI:10.1152/ajpregu.00205.2002  
[4] R. L. Holland et al. _Effects of raised body temperature on reasoning,
memory, and mood._ Journal of Applied Physiology. Dec 1985,59(6)1823-1827;  
[5] D.L. Palamarek & B.G. Rule. _The effects of ambient temperature and insult
on the motivation to retaliate or escape._ Motivation and Emotion. Mar 1979,
Volume 3 Issue 1, pp 83-92  
[6] http://psychcentral.com/blog/archives/2008/11/09/weather-can-change-your-
mood/

