---
title: 'The Danger of Rationality.'
tags: [Reflection]
status: publish
type: post
published: true
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.2)
  #teaser: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg

excerpt: "Rationality is a tool to express yourself, to organize yourself, and to
improve yourself. It is not a boulder behind which to hide yourself and your
choices, and it is certainly not justifiable grounds for rejecting
\"irrational\" opinions."
---
Let me open with an anecdote: last night I bought a rain jacket from
SportsChek, it was on sale 30% off for $100 and it's a relatively good brand
(as I was told by one extremely fashionable Western U girl). But the biggest
thing that did it for me was really the color scheme, which for some reason I
fell in love with at first sight. Having made the purchase, I informed the
parental units that I've bought my jacket this morning over breakfast, since
they knew I've been looking for one for a while. Upon demonstration, the
objections came in the following order:

1) "it's too small"  

_"but the sleeves are perfect length!"_

2) "there won't be enough room to fit a sweater under"  

\*_proceed to wear a hoodie underneath_\*

3) "the color scheme makes you look bottom-heavy/immature/etc"  

_"okay...."_

4) "the design is made for white folks with longer arms, you obviously have to
get a different brand"  

_"......"_  

5) "you just really love it now, wait till you become more rational after a
few days"

Pause. This simple, and honestly, quite standard exchange just enlightened me,
for the hundredth time, upon the reason for over 80% of the pointless
arguments I have, and I've formulated it, as titled, the danger of
rationality.

_____

Rationality exists within a particular system, a system with values and
mechanisms to achieve said values. From outside the scope of the system,
rational behaviors are really better described as consistent than logical.
However, it seems that this fact is obscure to all but the most rigorous of
mathematicians, those who do not preach "1+1=2", but that "1+1=2 is an
assumption". Those that set up the boundaries of the system are most aware of
the internal versus external, _the rational as the consistent_. Those of us
who have lived our entire lives within one system, however, struggle to make
sense of the possibility that another set of different behaviors can be
equally "rational". This, in essence, is the beauty and danger of rational
thinking: I am justified in rejecting your views, not because my views are
consistent for me in my system, but that my views are consistent for everyone,
with the implicit and forgotten assumption that we are within one system and
therefore, rational for everyone. Let me stress that, this is not just "I like
X because I just do", but "I like X because of logic, and how can we question
logic?" How convenient and secure.

Raised in a rational household and excelled in logical subjects, my whole life
until now has been devoted to rationality: math, physics, engineering. Slowly,
and I don't know when it happened, the rational thought process became my safe
haven, and shortly after that, my only mode of engagement with the external
world. I embraced what I could reason through and denounced what was
arbitrary. I accepted your superiority if you could logically convince me of
your views, while I secretly pronounced you stupid if you didn't follow my
line of reasoning: boundary, value, mechanism- the whole package. When I
arrived for Engineering Science at UofT, I thought I would bask in the glory
of certainty, objectivity, **rationality,** both in my studies and in the
people around me. Never will I have a stupid argument again, because we can
work things out as, wait for it, _human beings_. It's almost comical now that
I look back, when I sought out my first summer research project, which was
titled: **classification of emotions through psychophysiological markers**. In
other words, rationalizing what's systematically arbitrary with mechanisms I
understand in the only system I've ever known. Later, I met some of my best
friends, who just happen to share my righteous obsession of rationality.
Ironically, it is exactly through my very real and sometimes difficult
interactions with them, and of course, with my better half, that I've slowly
been able to understand the boundaries of my own system. After all, when a
group of extremely logical people argue for hours on end with no resolution,
with perfectly justifiable facts, mind you, the only _logical_ conclusion is
that there are fundamental differences in the systems we reside in.

Let me finish here before I end up telling my whole life story. My point is
not to prescribe a life with no rationality- that would indeed be stupid. As
any advice in life, it is only valuable given the context that came before it,
and in this case, let this be the advice I give a 16-year-old, rational, me:
rationality is a tool to express yourself, to organize yourself, and to
improve yourself. It is not a boulder behind which to hide yourself and your
choices, and it is certainly not justifiable grounds for rejecting
"irrational" opinions. Engage people around you as who you are, not the system
you operate in, and more importantly, do the same for them. Now let me give
the same advice to my 23-year-old self, because god knows I'll need it. Oh
yeah, did I mention that my newest obsession is now a mechanistic
understanding of human cognition and consciousness?

I think I'll keep the jacket.
