---
title: 'Review: Traditional Chinese Medicine in Science'
categories: []
tags: []
status: draft
type: post
published: false
meta: {}
---

_What?_

To what extend have the 1) efficacy and 2) mechanism of traditional Chinese
medicine been reported in published scientific studies?

_Why?_

This review is mainly the result of a conversation with my mom, who swears by
how effective Chinese medicine is in treating body-wide and non-specific
issues. The question is not whether it is effective, because I believe most
Chinese people have had successful treatments (myself included), and a billion
people in China receive it as the co-primary method of care. Also, my
intuition tells me that a few thousand years of trial and error should have
resulted in some useful conclusions that are passed down from generation to
generation, which could very well be unfounded in the scientific sense. In
fact, a few pharmacology breakthroughs in Western medicine every year are just
that- stumbled upon, especially when it comes to treating psychological
disorders [1]. The question is, rather, to what extend has the positive
effects of traditional medicine been studied and explained. I'm going to lay
out my disclaimer here that I wholeheartedly (and my mother too) believe in
Western medicine, and in no way am I encouraging homeopathic treatments in
place of scientifically proven medicine. I also don't claim any expertise in
pharmacology, only drawing on my basic knowledge in biochemistry and
electrophysiology to understand what I'm about to review. That being said,
let's get the show on the road!

_How?_

I'm going to limit my scope here to include only herbal medicine and
acupuncture. Herbal medicine, probably like all pharmacological compounds, are
extremely hard to study systematically. Not only is it hard to trace the exact
mechanism of action through which it heals the body, my guess is that we don't
even have any clue as to what the active ingredients are in a particular pot
of black stew. But at the very least, we can see if there are any clinical
studies with positive results. Similarly, I don't have much hope for finding a
good explanation of acupuncture, but clinical studies will be satisfactory. In
fact, that is how I will organize the review: **a brief overview of
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), reported clinical success, and finally,
proposed mechanisms**.

**Overview** (aka a read-through of the Wikipedia article [2])

Without going on too much of a tangent, I will summarize what I think is
relevant:

