---
title: 'Neuroscience: Watching the World Series in a Room Behind Tall People.'
tags: [Brain & Cognition, Science Communication]
status: publish
type: post
published: true
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.2)
  #teaser: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg

excerpt: "Yes, I am, once again,
shamelessly pasting homework assignments onto the blog, but this one I'm
rather happy with. Plus, it's in the spirit of the World Series, even though I
literally watched my first full inning of baseball when the Jays lost in game
6."
---
I've always wanted to write about some of the fundamental ideas in
neuroscience in a people-friendly way. The problem is, it always seemed to be
way too daunting to explain such fundamental ideas in any reasonably short
blog entry, given all the history behind the idea and the recent debates over
it. Well, nothing screams challenge than to do exactly that for a bunch of
high school students, with a hard limit of ONE PAGE. Yes, I am, once again,
shamelessly pasting homework assignments onto the blog, but this one I'm
rather happy with. Plus, it's in the spirit of the World Series, even though I
literally watched my first full inning of baseball when the Jays lost in game
6.

This is a summary of a paper published a few years ago, which I thought was
excellent science. Plus, it's a step forward for one of the fundamental ideas
in neuroscience: information coding. I originally wanted to expand the version
I had for the high schoolers, add some details here and there, and post it as
a modified version. But god knows 1) I'm lazy and 2) I'll probably add 2 pages
worth of stuff to this 1 page summary. Alas, here it is. Do let me know if it
speaks to your inner high school self. I don't know if the paper is open
access now, but it's linked at the bottom.

* * *

It’s Game 7 of the World Series, and your whole school (in Kansas) is packed
into the gym watching a tiny TV. The problem is, so many people are standing
in front of you that you can’t see anymore, but you still want to know what’s
happening: what can you do? We all know that people lose all ability to speak
coherently in the heat of the game, so you can’t ask someone to describe the
events, but you CAN observe how intensely people are cheering around you, and
the reaction of the room in general: quiet crowd, no runs; room explodes,
someone probably scored. Your problem, as a scientist, is to guess the events
on TV based solely on people’s responses, but you can only pay attention to so
much. Then, is it more informative to listen for your friends immediately
around you, since you know when and how they usually respond? Or is it better
to listen to the room as a whole? This is exactly the question these
neuroscientists are trying to answer – only, for the brain.

One of the fundamental assumptions we make in neuroscience is that events that
occur in the world around us are reflected in brain activity. For example, to
‘hear’ your favorite song, your brain must process the sounds and identify it.
How the brain does this is not 100% clear yet, but what we do know is that
neurons – the fundamental information processing cells in the brain – respond
to stimuli by changing when and how fast they ‘fire’ action potentials.
Imagine if each of the 80 billion neurons in your brain is a tiny person, and
the only way they can respond (as far as we know) is by shouting ‘YAY!’ When
it sees something it likes, it gets excited and shouts ‘YAY YAY YAY’;
otherwise, it stays silent. For a long time now, we’ve known that individual
neurons respond to their preferred stimulus (sound, image, etc.) by changing
the rate of their response, analogous to how fast it’s shouting (firing rate).
Then, if we were to record the activity of a neuron - let’s call it Ned - as
it responds to a sound, we’d be able to see how much of the sound corresponds
to Ned’s activity, via “mutual information”. Essentially, mutual information
quantifies how successfully we could guess the sound by observing Ned’s
response. In our baseball example, Ned (from New York) cheering shares high
mutual information with the Mets scoring a run. Similarly, the aggregate
response of many neurons (like our crowd), called local field potential, could
also be informative, even though we lose the individuals’ identities. These
are all ways your brain can “code” information, so which is the most
informative?

In this paper, the authors answer this question by playing sounds to a monkey,
and measuring the mutual information between various sounds and the monkey’s
brain response – both from individual neurons and the local field potential.
Historically, neuroscientists have been fixated on the firing rate of
individual neurons, but this study shows that other “codes” could be much more
informative and reliable, especially in combination, such as the timing
relationship between several different neurons’ response, as well as the
relative timing of action potentials with respective to the local field.
Intuitively, hearing Ned cheer could mean one of many things – the Mets
pitching a strike, getting on base, or scoring a run. But hearing the room
cheering and immediately groaning followed by Ned shouting excitedly probably
means that the Royals almost hit it out the park, only to be caught by the
Mets outfield leaping off the fence to make the catch. This is a really
exciting result because it shows that the brain works as a whole, such that
combinations of responses give us the most information about what we observe
around us, and it opens up new ways for neuroscientists to accurately decode
information in the brain, taking us a step closer to understanding how it all
works.

Source: [Kayser et al. 2009. Neuron.](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0896627309000750)
