---
title: In a situation like this, words, let alone hashtags, truly cannot capture how
  you feel.
categories:
- Reflection
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta: {}
---

I debated with myself for a long time whether I should write this, partly
because I try not to make social commentaries online in fear of ending up on
the wrong side of internet famous, and partly because I just don't know what I
would say. But after hours of contemplation, the message I wanted to send
materialized, and with it, how I wanted to craft it. If you're going to read
it, read the whole thing, because I say some pretty stupid things in the
middle.

I first heard about the Paris events yesterday afternoon, so I popped open BBC
news on my phone and promptly realized that it was so recent that even BBC had
no idea what had happened yet, nor was there reports on ISIS or any Islamic
involvement, only that 100 people were killed in a mass shooting and bombing.
My first reaction? "Wow, again? Although...it's weird that it's in France,
don't they have better gun control over there?" Honestly, that was it. Why?
Because it seems that every week somebody somewhere decides to shoot up a
bunch of innocent people, and frankly I'm getting pretty desensitized about it
because sitting on the toilet at school reading BBC without a kill count would
be a rare day. I'm not saying that's an okay reaction to have, I'm just
telling you what I thought.

Anyway, then I went about my day as usual. I was on a writing roll, so time
went by pretty quickly, then I had to go to a hockey game, but before I left
the house I checked Facebook, and saw the status updates rolling in. "Praying
for Paris." Honestly, if it wasn't for the fact that I had to run out, I think
I might have said something stupid on Facebook. Because my first reaction to
this, as it always is, was "this is fucking stupid." First of all, how many
people that were praying for Paris actually uttered a prayer? What would you
even say? Yes, your thoughts are with Paris, but why does Facebook need to
know? Second of all, how many people actually had French friends ON Facebook?
I'd understand if it was Canada or America, and we wanted to show support for
our friends and family, but in this case, for the majority of people I knew on
Facebook, literally nobody affected is going to see any of this, so what the
hell are we doing? (Ironic enough, I happen to have French friends. If you're
reading this, hope everything's well).

Like I said, that was my immediate thought, and judging by some backlash on
social media, I wasn't the only person thinking that way, though I salute your
bravery and stupidity if you had actually said/typed that out loud. I was
mildly annoyed, but went to an otherwise enjoyable hockey game with some
friends in the department, where surprisingly, none of us mentioned anything
of Paris until the ride home. However, I did have a brief moment to chat to my
better half on the instant messages (yay technology), and in between my
transcription of an unusually exciting minor league hockey game, I put in a
rare complaint about how stupid I thought the whole hashtag activism was. I
was then promptly enlightened as I was told to imagine what it would be like
if this had happen in my own peaceful city. I still maintain that the status
updates does absolutely nothing for Paris, for the people that died, and
arguably little for the living people of the city, but it got me thinking.

Then I came home, got on Facebook. Bad idea: the world was going to shits.

Paris gets shot up by Islamic extremists, so the world shows support via
#prayforparis. Then, somebody got angry that there had been a bombing earlier
this week, in Lebanon, with almost no news coverage. So the #prayforbeirut
guys got angry at the #prayforparis guys for being hypocritical and selective
activists. I honestly didn't even know about the Lebanese bombing because I
guess I didn't go on BBC on Thursday, probably worrying shitless (no toilet
trips, get it?) about my midterm. In any case, that somehow invoked the social
justice warrior within me to condemn the hypocrisy of the Western world, EVEN
THOUGH I had no fucking clue that it had even happened before this whole Paris
chaos. Okay. Then somebody else got angry that nobody's been paying attention
to the daily tragedies going on in the Middle East, nobody fucking prayed for
Turkey when THEY got bombed in the middle of a goddamn peace rally, and
certainly nobody prayed for Syria, because, well, then you'd have to update
your status to "prayforsyria" pretty much every single day for the past 3
years. So now we have #prayforparis, #prayforbeirut, #prayforsyria, and the
best one, #prayforeveryone & #prayfortheworld. Then things got kind of weird,
people started posting things like thousands of innocent people get shot in
America by the cops, so #prayforblacks.

And of course, there was what I had feared the most, Islamphobia. I have
Muslim friends, and this is not like a white-folks-saying "I have black
friends" kind of thing. No, I have Muslim friends who are - by no means is
this derogatory - regular fucking people. So it doesn't only hurt my brain how
illogical it is to group all Muslims with 8 idiots who may or may not even be
actually Muslim, it pains me to think that this is yet another round of gas
top-up for those that are looking for an excuse to be bigoted. Seriously, if
nobody says Christians are terrorists by quoting the KKK and the Westboro
Baptist Church, why is it okay to equate some random bumfuck terrorists with
good people living all around you? Fine, white America wants to hate on
Muslims, go ahead, it's not the worst thing. The worst is when people are
rallying behind this for political action against Syrian refugees AND heavier
military involvement in Syria. Canada recently pulled out of operations
against ISIS, so naturally people took the opportunity here to say, well, we
done goofed. My question is, how can any of us have the balls to make a
political statement like that when there clearly is no solid evidence for
either being a good solution? I'm not saying I know what the best thing to do
is, but I'm pretty confident that none of us do.

Why are we all so angry?

All of this was last night, at which point I thought, maybe I should unplug.
But I couldn't go to sleep because my microwave broke and I was oven-baking
some food since I had the munchies after one too many 2 dollar beer at the
game. So I just sat there. I really wanted to write something, but I didn't
know what it was, so I didn't, because I knew it was going to be yet another
commentary on how some group of you were stupid and unreasonable for saying
one thing but not the other, and I didn't really have a message to send to
anyone, other than maybe "hey you should all listen to me because I figured it
out", all the while feeling confused as ever about why there is so much random
outrage.

Sitting around doing nothing has a weird effect of making you think, and it
was thanks to my traditional oven taking forever to do a job that my microwave
would have done in 2 minutes, that I realized I was really sad, and scared,
and angry, and frustrated. I was all of those things that were not directed at
anyone, but just was. I didn't think I was that sad about Paris when I first
read about it, but it turns out, I was. I've been to Paris, it's beautiful on
a Friday night. It's beautiful on any night, really. It has an atmosphere of
carefreeness and spontaneous magic that was almost true to what the movies
made it look like. All the lights turn on and people enjoy themselves and have
a good time sitting by the river, outside cafes, wherever. It's incredibly
saddening to imagine the chaos on an otherwise peaceful and joyous weekend
night. It's even more painful and scary to think about what it would've been
like if it was in my city, if it was my friends and family that I had to fear
the lives for. Then I was frustrated, about why this even happened, feeling
ever more helpless that there really is no clear solution to this, to the
Syrian tragedy, to people dying namelessly, to why, apparently, a father of
two kids had to sacrifice himself and jump the second bomber in Beirut to save
the lives of everyone going to market. What the hell am I, or are any of us,
supposed to do? Meanwhile, I'm really confused as to what the government is
supposed to do, and why everyone thinks they know what the best thing is. If I
hadn't known better, I would've mistaken my Facebook feed for a Parliament
gathering because of all the discussions going on.

Then I realized this: people on my Facebook and Twitter feed are JUST people.
My friends, colleagues, people from school I've never ever talked to, random
people I've met - regular ass people. And if I was feeling all these ways
about what had happened, and what's been happening, then maybe they are too?
Maybe #prayingforparis is not suppose to do anything for Paris, but for us?
Maybe we're all scared, alone, and frustrated, and #prayingforparis and beirut
and syria and blacks and everyone is not a suggestion for action, but a reach-
out to be consoled, feel united, and be reassured that somebody out there will
care about us in the same way and make sure that we're safe from these
senseless tragedies. Maybe people don't realize that they're feeling this way,
maybe they're not even feeling this way, but it certainly made me see
everything in a different light. Instead of thinking that every hashtag was
stupid, I should've realized that behind every hashtag was another individual
that was rocked by Paris, Beirut, and Syria. But for some reason, we don't
want to express that. We want to express WHY we should be sad about Paris
versus Lebanon, WHY it's not okay that one thing is getting more media
coverage than the other, WHY the Western world should care about the Middle
East just as much as it cares about France. But that's not why we post these
statuses. We all know that status updates don't save lives, neither does
putting our profile photo behind a French flag. I hope I'm not senselessly
optimistic when I say that I really do believe that we, as humans, just want
to feel less sad and less powerless. So I'm really, really sorry I thought
your status update was stupid (in my head). Maybe I was the only person, if
so, then I'm sorry for being a Judgemental Judy - I'm slow to empathize.

And then I realized what my message was: let's stop judging each other for
which hashtag and status updates we choose. Nobody likes a social justice
warrior no matter what you're fighting for. Instead, just stop and think for a
moment, process our own emotions, and console everyone about their own
plights. No one is wrong in feeling sad or angry about Paris or Beirut or
anywhere for that matter. It's a fucked up thing that happened. But don't
offer up solutions, because nobody - not me, not you, not Obama - knows what
the hell they're talking about.

Instead, go hug someone, or call or email someone, and tell them how you
really feel. I'm sorry this happened, and that these things continue to happen
all around the world.

