---
title: ''
categories: []
tags: []
status: draft
type: post
published: false
meta: {}
---

People say books can be life changing. I don't read much for leisure anymore,
and I certainly haven't had a life changing experience from reading a book.
Sure, I've read books that were insightful and interesting, but life changing
seemed like a stretch to me. That is, until I had finished reading The Man Who
Mistook His Wife For A Hat, by the late Oliver Sacks. Maybe life changing
isn't the right term. It was revelatory. An experience like this has the
curious effect of revealing about something about the world around you, but
also the world within. I doubt other people will feel as special of a place
for this book as I did, I guess that's how it taught me something about
myself.

The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat is, quite simply, a collection of short
essays by the late neurologist. My first inclination is to call it a casebook,
as he describes the curious cases of a dozen or so of his past patients,
suffering from a range of neurological disorders. But it couldn't be farther
from the truth.

It made me realize something about myself. No, it made me remember something
about myself. Maybe since I was 10, before I had ever heard of psychology,
neuroscience, or cognition, I was intensely curious about why people were so
damn unpredictable, and sometimes, insensible. Why, as a part of the physical
world that we've been able to characterize to ever greater detail, have we not
been able to get a grasp of why people do things the way they do, and think
the way they think? To me, people should behave like math does: reasonably,
and it was a source of great academic curiosity, but also of growing personal
pain, that people didn't act reasonably and logically all the time.

As I grew older, I've (arguably) become better in my personal life at seeing
people as more than robots in loose meat sacks, and that people's
idiosyncrasies and deviation from predictability were all a part of who they
are. Though this realization came gradually, and often, begrudgingly out of
resignation. On the other hand, I was exposed to and became fascinated with
the field of psychology - a whole academic discipline dedicated to discovering
the patterns of human behavior! It was at least somewhat satisfactory to me,
back then, that it seemed feasible to make generalizable claims about patterns
of human behavior. Sure, the descriptions were often foggy and true in the
statistical sense, but it was literally tying (sometimes) mathematical
descriptions to human behavior. Imagine my joy. In fact, I was so interested
in it that 3 out of my 4 college applications went out to Psychology programs.
As I have said this to a few people before, it was only through a very
fortuitous sequence of events, none of which was of my own volition (maybe
other than the fact that I was good at math), that I ended up graduating as an
engineer. I'm not being disparaging to Psych majors when I say that, I simply
found out later on that 4 years of undergrad classes in psychology would not
have been my cup of tea.

