---
title: "LSD, Neuroscience, and Science Communication for the Armed and Dangerous."
tags: [Brain & Cognition, Science Communication, Readings]
status: publish
type: post
published: true
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2016-04-24-LSD1.png
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.7)
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/2016-04-24-LSD1.png

excerpt: "Basically, armed and dangerous means that you are educated enough to understand the information, perhaps because you have an education in sciences or a related field, and you WILL make life decisions based on it."
---

**tl;dr** : started out explaining a paper about LSD, visual hallucination,
and fMRI; ended by ranting about science journalism. If you don't care about
LSD, skip right to the end.

* * *

Earlier last week, a new [scientific
study](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2016/04/05/1518377113.full) was
published and received quite a lot of news coverage. The topic under
investigation? Brains on LSD. Since it has brains, drugs, some foundational
techniques in cognitive neuroscience, and apparently the neuroscience-
equivalent of the Higgs Boson, I thought it'd be fun to do a quick dissection
of the actual paper, and offer what will certainly be a much more nuanced (and
hopefully more informed) perspective than some of the news coverage with
overblown interpretations. But to start, I will leave you with the
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lysergic_acid_diethylamide) blurb,

> Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), also known as acid, is a psychedelic drug
known for its psychological effects, which include altered thinking processes,
closed- and open-eye visuals, synesthesia, an altered sense of time, and
spiritual experiences. It is used mainly as a recreational drug and for
spiritual reasons.

and this article from [the
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/11/lsd-impact-brain-
revealed-groundbreaking-images).

**What is brain?**  
To sufficiently explain this study, we have to go over a few basic concepts
about the brain first. In one sentence: our brains are composed of billions of
brain cells (neurons), and they work via exchange of electrical and chemical
signals delivered between neurons, which fulfills the roles of information
transmission, computation, and storage. Of course, when I say that, it's a
very physical (and vague) description of the underlying biology, and we have
very little certainty about how information (like a memory) is actually
represented. But for today, we can think of the brain as a whole lot of people
talking via text messages, and packets of chemical signals called
neurotransmitters, are the messages flowing from one person (neuron) to
another. At this point, there are two important things to understand.

1\. Serotonin  
Neurons, like people, come in all kinds of different personalities. Each type
of neuron can only **send one type** of message, dictated by which
neurotransmitter it releases to other neurons, while they can **receive many
types** of different messages, meaning that they will respond to different
types of neurotransmitters. Serotonin is one such neurotransmitter, and
neurons all over the brain have the ability to receive this chemical and
respond to it in different ways. You may have heard phrases such as "serotonin
is the neurotransmitter of happiness" or "dopamine means reward", but those
are gross oversimplifications. As far as we know, there is a small cluster of
serotonin neurons in the lower parts of the brain that, under normal
conditions, send messages to other neurons ALL OVER the brain, to modulate
their activity. The physiological effect of that on the receiving neurons is
diverse and rather beyond my knowledge, and it actually goes beyond the brain
to have direct and secondary effects on other parts of the body, such as the
heart.

LSD, then, is a substitute for serotonin, as in when LSD is delivered to your
brain, it acts just like serotonin, even though those serotonin neurons didn't
send any messages. From the point of view of the receiving neurons, they
couldn't care less. In fact, neurons EVERYWHERE throughout the brain are
receiving text messages that look like this:

> LETS PARTY

— serotonin neurons

So you know what they're about to do - they're gonna get turnt up. And I was
just informed via Wikipedia that LSD is unique in that it not only mimics
serotonin, but dopamine as well, for a subset of receiving neurons. So for
those neurons, the message is loud and clear:

> PARTY WITH SEROTONIN NEURONS. TURN DOWN FOR WAT

— dopamine neurons

(Actually, I just realized that an understanding of LSD is not at all required
to understand this study, since it does not at all investigate the mechanism
behind it. But still, these things are good to know.)

2\. Cerebral Blood Flow (CBF)  
Neurons need basic resources to stay active, so when they are communicating a
lot (via "action potentials"), they need more food and oxygen delivered to
them. It turns out, blood delivers food and oxygen, and someone pretty smart
figured out that if you measure blood flow to an area of the brain, you can
make a guess of how hard neurons in that region are working. This is the basis
of functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) in neuroscience, and while
there are several techniques that measure slightly different aspects of this
signal, they are all related to changes in blood flow and blood oxygenation.
The important thing to remember here is that CBF is an interpretation of
neural activity, not an actual measurement. It's like if I were to measure how
much food you eat per day to infer your activities: I can tell on days that
you eat a lot that you were really hungry and probably did a lot of physical
activity, but I won't be able to say exactly what you did. While this is a
limitation for neuroscience research, it's largely an assumption that we are
willing to make so we can infer SOMETHING about mental processes while
measuring a physical signal.

**What actually happens when brain is on LSD?**  
Now that we know all about how brains work and how to measure brain activity,
let's get on to the paper. The experiment is simple. As with almost all
cognitive neuroscience experiments, they want to measure people's brains while
they have some kind of mental experience, and see if the two have any kind of
relationship. Now the title of the paper almost makes perfect sense: **Neural
correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal neuroimaging**. I like
straightforward titles.

So the setup is this: inject people with a small dose of LSD, then scan their
brains while they do nothing (turns out they hallucinate). Have the same
people come back, inject them with salt water, then scan their brains again
while they do nothing (hopefully they don't hallucinate). Measure their brains
and ask them a bunch of questions like "how much did you hallucinate" and "how
much oneness did you experience with the universe", and see if there is a
relationship between their brain activity and their mental experience. Well,
onto the results then!

* * *
![](/assets/images/blog/2016-04-24-LSD1.png)


**Visual hallucination correlates with VISUAL cortex activation**  
Figure 1 of the paper is shown above. The first row of brains is a snapshot of
the blood flow to the participants' brains at 4 different depths (and a side
view), and you can see that, when you are alive, blood flows to most parts of
your brain (I thought we only used 10% of our brains???). The second row -
when on acid - shows almost the exact same thing, and it's only when you
subtract the 1st row from the 2nd, do you see an increase of blood flow to a
small area in the back of the head, known as the visual cortex. This is the
area of the brain that is activated when we see things, except, in this case,
they're "seeing" mentally, because they're hallucinating. I'm not sure how
this compares to when people try to visually IMAGINE, without doing drugs, but
that would've been a better control condition. The scatterplot at the bottom
shows that people's self-report of visual hallucination correlates with how
much more their visual cortex is activated. In other words, the more you felt
that you hallucinated, the more your brain was actually activated - pretty
neat!

It's important to bring up a subtle point here: this experiment demonstrates
the neural correlate of visual hallucination (i.e.LSD experience), not of LSD
itself. Because people displayed a RANGE of altered behavior, since, as you
can see, a few people reported almost no changes to their degree of visual
hallucination (I'd love to know if it's because their "normal" visual
experience is just the fucking bomb), it meant that LSD did not affect
everyone in the same way. This will be true for the rest of the paper, in that
their goal was to measure how brain activity alters in relation to the
**experiences** LSD can trigger, but not how LSD works physiologically.

* * *

![](/assets/images/blog/2016-04-24-LSD2.png)

**Visual hallucination correlates with increased "connectivity" of the visual
cortex to other parts of the brain**  
Forget about what I said at beginning, THIS figure is the reason why I'm
writing this post. I don't have a particular problem with the actual figure in
the paper per se (although plotting z-score is somewhat atrocious), but the
way it was used in the Guardian article. In the article, the caption reads: "
**A second image shows different sections of the brain, either on placebo, or
under the influence of LSD (lots of orange)** ". Now, if you didn't know any
neuroscience at all and was shown this picture, what would be your first guess
at what's going on here? Well, I can tell you what I thought after two years
into graduate school: holy Batman, LSD makes your brain go crazy! The first
time I heard about this study was, in fact, through the Guardian article, and
I was shocked at how much effect LSD had in activating the entire brain. Alas,
it was a good idea to read the actual paper: I was so perplexed because
nowhere in there did it mention profound increase in brain activity. Well,
it's because there wasn't. In fact, we just saw in the previous section that
there was no increase in brain activity other than in a tiny region in the
visual cortex. So what is this figure actually depicting then?

To understand that, I need to explain one more concept: **resting state
functional connectivity (RSFC)**. Recall earlier we said that brain areas that
are working harder requires more blood to be delivered, and this signal is
recorded via fMRI and fluctuates rapidly, on the order of seconds. If two
areas (A and B) show similar fluctuation of activity over time, then, we would
assume that there is some special relationship between them. You might say
that region A is sending messages to region B to activate it in a very similar
way, causing the correlated activity. But without detailed knowledge of
anatomical connectivity, this is a huge assumption. Instead, we simply call
these two areas "functionally connected", and it's a measure of correlation
between the blood flow signals of these areas. If we can correlated area A
with area B, we can do it for A with C, A with D, etc. In this way, we hold
area A as the "seed", use its signal as a reference, and correlate the signals
of every other brain region with it to build a functional connectivity map,
which is exactly what Figure 2 shows.

In the top row, our reference signal (seed) is taken from the visual cortex
(purple blob), and the redness of the other areas indicate how correlated each
of those areas are with it. I believe (I could be wrong) the actual color
represents the z-score of the correlation, which is NOT the strength of the
correlation, but how UNLIKELY that the observed correlation is due to chance.
I don't do fMRI work, so I don't know what to criticize it too much without
reading into it, and if someone can inform me of the actual reason, that would
be great. But in general I don't know why the magnitude of the correlation is
not plotted instead. ANYWAY, end rant. So in the middle row, we see that when
hallucinating on LSD, many more areas of the brain (almost all of it) become
"functionally connected" with the visual cortex, i.e. their fluctuating
activities show increased correlation in time. The bottom row is once again
the difference, and the scatterplot demonstrates that the more self-reported
change in visual hallucination, the more change in functional connectivity
(though it's debatable which is causing which).

Anyway, how this figure was used made me very unhappy, but I will try to wrap
up the paper quickly and come back to it at the end.

* * *

![](/assets/images/blog/2016-04-24-LSD3.png)

**"Ego dissolution" correlates with decreased connectivity of
parahippocampus**  
The good thing about learning stuff is that it will maybe sometimes
generalize. In this case, Figure 3 is in the exact same format as Figure 2,
just with a different seed brain area and a different behavioral measure.
Parahippocampus (purple blob again) is one of those areas in the brain where,
if you were to ask someone what it does, they'll either say "hell if I know",
OR they might say something stupid like "it recognizes scenery". I'm in the
former camp, mainly because it's an understudied area, and it's
(unfortunately) involved with more abstract processes like social behavior,
which you can't really measure from a non-human mammal, or at least we don't
have a great behavioral assay for it. A brief Wikipedia search will tell you
that it's involved in schizophrenia and scene recognition, so take from it
what you will. As far as I can tell, these authors basically picked it since
there was prior evidence linking its activity to psychosis-like states under
LSD.

"Ego dissolution", on the behavioral side, is also a fun one, I won't even
attempt to find a definition for it, although I'm sure there was a somewhat
tangible meaning in the surveys. Or, who knows, maybe it's the kind of shit
that you just have to take LSD to know what it's like, and since the
participants were all experienced drug users, they would be the ones to know.
I guess if you want to find out what that's like, drop acid (or meditate
deeply, I've read that induces similar states.) In any case, the result here
is straightforward: decreased functional connectivity, particularly between
the parahippocampus and the [posterior cingulate cortex
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Posterior_cingulate)(PCC, large blue blob in
the bottom row), correlates with the "magnitude" of ego-dissolution. The PCC
has actually been studied a fair amount in the last 5 to 10 years, in the
context of awareness and conscious experiences of the world. Interestingly
enough, PCC is more activated during self-related thinking and decreased
during meditation.

* * *

![](/assets/images/blog/2016-04-24-LSD4.png)

**The "LSD experience" connects resting state networks**  
For the previous two results, when the activity of one area of the brain is
coupled with that of another, we said they were functionally connected, and
you could then say that they were elements of a "network", since they are,
effectively, in sync, albeit we do not know the direction of interaction
between the two areas. Taking that a step further, we can look at all the
areas of the brain simultaneously, and segregate brain regions into distinct
networks based on the similarity of their activity. For example, if areas A,
B, and F are co-activated, while C, D, and E are co-activated, we would call
these two different networks with three elements (or nodes) each. This is
exactly what **resting state networks (RSN)** are. Basically, when people lie
in the MRI scanner and do nothing, somehow, about 10 or so brain networks
consistently show up, each with roughly the same functionally connected areas
between different people. Thus, they were dubbed RESTING STATE networks.
Nobody really knows for sure what they do or why they are there, but there are
some ideas such as a network that keeps visual vigilance even when you're not
looking at anything in particular, such that when threats do appear, you have
time to react. Others, such as the default mode network, are related to self-
referential thinking that inevitably happens when you are told to lie in a
tiny tube and do nothing. My favorite aliases for these are, for example, the
"thinking about my lunch" network and "did I lock my door" network.

In this last figure, then, we see the activity of these 12 resting state
networks (purple blobs) change during the experience of LSD. Firstly, only the
3 visual RSNs saw slight increase in blood flow (CBF, red bars) under LSD
compared to control, once again showing that LSD does not actually increase
neural activity. On the other hand, all 12 networks saw consistent decrease in
network **integrity** , meaning the activity of members (brain areas) within
each network became less similar under LSD (blue bars). Finally, the activity
of different RSNs became more like each other, i.e. decreased **segregation**
, as shown in the last checkerboard plot where each tile is the increase in
activity similarity between the network in that row and column (diagonals
blank since the same network is always exactly similar to itself).

All in all, the conclusion is that while tripping on acid, the visual networks
are more activated and "more connected" to other brain regions, particularly
in the context of visual hallucination, while these resting state networks
often associated with thinking about self and rumination are "more dissolved."
I think that this is a great study ("Higgs Boson of neuroscience" might have
been overstating it) and a good first step towards legitimizing drug-related
brain research, one avenue that we are really not taking advantage of. Given
that these people are experienced users, we're not introducing additional
risks by having them do drugs while getting their brain scanned, and it can
reveal a lot of interesting things that brains under normal conditions simply
cannot.

* * *

**Science Communication and Journalism**  
With the study out of the way, I want to take this opportunity to comment on
pop science. I've been wanting to write something about it for a year and half
now, but never found the "right" thing to dig into, but since I already went
through the science behind this particular study, I might as well take the
opportunity to look at how news articles deliver. As always, there is a
diversity of nonsense, depending on which news outlet you're looking at. One
example, headline from [The Washington
Post](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/04/13/what-your-brain-
actually-looks-like-on-drugs/): " **Groundbreaking images show how LSD
literally lights up your brain.** " While the article itself has some
redeemable qualities and insights, this title is the kind of thing that makes
me want to strangle a journalist. First of all, what the fuck does it mean to
literally light up the brain? It certainly does not refer to the dramatic
increase in neural activity under LSD, because there was none. My only
interpretation for this is that this particular author saw Figure 2 in the
paper and literally transcribed his LITERAL interpretation of those figures.
The problem, I believe, arises from a lack of background context and formal
training. I'm not trying to be a snobby educated person or anything, but those
images will show different things to a layman vs. someone who has even the
least bit of knowledge about brain imaging, such that the latter would never
think to describe it as "lit up". And I don't mean to rip into this one person
in particular, it happens time and time again, and every time I see something
like this I just experience a cycle of anger, disgust, reluctant acceptance,
and fear that someone will "learn" something from this article. Again, I don't
necessarily believe that it's one person refusing to do their job properly,
but that they lack the proper training to interpret neuroscience studies.

This problem is better highlighted in an article that's not such a blatant
offender. The Guardian article, for example, was great. It did not stretch the
interpretation of the study, and generally described the results in line with
how the authors did in the paper itself. But after a close reading, it is
apparent that it is only that: an accurate recount of the findings in the
study that skip details whenever possible, and with little actual understand
of the topic at hand. For example, "functional connectivity" means a very
different thing to a fMRI scientist, because it does not imply actual
connectivity, as I outlined above. But for a lay person exposed with the
basics of the brain, connectivity in the context of neuroscience probably
means physical connections, i.e. synapses. In other words, I wouldn't put it
past someone to interpret this finding as "LSD increases brain connections."
Also, posting the figure without a detailed explanation of what the colors and
blobs mean is a dangerous thing to do, because then it allows any one person's
literal interpretation of the image with the apparent validity of "science",
such that you get shit like "LSD lights up the brain". This is not a
hypothetical situation, I know because I also came to my own interpretation of
the image after reading the news article (maybe I'm just not critical?), which
was promptly corrected after reading the actual paper.

So why is this a problem? Well, on a smaller scale, it's not. Worst case
scenario is that some people are slightly misinformed about the effect of LSD,
and you might say that the people who will get it wrong don't matter because
it's just a light bathroom reading for them, and the people who will get it
right will get it right anyway because they don't base their perception on
secondary reporting in news articles (though let's be honest, who's going to
read the actual paper?) This assumes a two-tier population in terms of
scientific understanding, which leads us to think about who these news report
of science are targeting - and I think this gets at the actual problem. The
reality is, there is a spectrum of lay people in terms of their engagement
with science, and depending on what field you work in, even scientists get
relocated on this spectrum. By that I mean, for example, I will read
neuroscience papers for their findings and implications but I get most of my
understanding of new breakthroughs in physics through the news app on my
phone, and not the primary sources themselves, because I don't have the
understanding required to evaluate the study in its raw form.

I think to accurately describe this situation, we need a model with three
groups of people. The first group is the "scientists", people that care
tremendously about the details of a particular reporting and will make
informed choices based on what they read. Most people that fall within this
group are probably actual scientists and graduate students, but lay people who
are particularly interested in a line of research for whatever reason also
fall in here. The second group is what I would call one-and-doners: people who
read these things purely as a past-time and does not take any of this into
their actual lives. Classic example: your grandma. These first two groups are
not interesting, because they are the people who will get it right anyway and
the people for whom it really doesn't matter.

The third group is what I would call "armed and dangerous", and given the
dramatic increase in our ability to access information via the internet, this
is a growing group of concern. Basically, "armed and dangerous" means that you
are educated enough to understand the information, perhaps because you have an
education in sciences or a related field, and you WILL make life decisions
based on it. Not only do these people have the power to change their own
lives, they have the power to influence people around them and even society as
a whole via voting and lobbying and protesting. For these people, they will
trust the news articles for what they are, perhaps because they don't have the
ability or desire to read the actual papers (like me with physics). In this
case, it's absolutely crucial to convey the information in the most accurate
way possible, and "increased connectivity" vs. "increased functional
connectivity" vs. "the brain lit up" all have very different outcomes for
these people. In the context of LSD, it probably doesn't really matter,
because it's quite a niche thing in people's daily lives. But if we look at
other health-related research that can potentially alter someone's lifestyle
and behavior, such as marijuana research, nutrition research, and, oh god,
vaccine research, conveying information accurately becomes very, very
important. It's the same thing as politics, for democracy to work, your voting
base should be as informed as possible. While this is proving to be more and
more untrue as this clusterfuck unfolds in the U.S., I would say it's even
more important for the voting base to be informed accurately regarding
science.

This, then, becomes an engineering problem for science journalism: how do you
write for the lay-but-educated population, for whom actionable outcomes are a
very real possibility, while still keeping the content engaging so information
is disseminated and the company gets paid? Well, for one, maybe it helps to
have semi-experts that can outline the important assumptions and
interpretations of a particular study. Grad students and neuroscientists all
know, for example, that any fMRI research comes with the invisible disclaimer
in the first line that says "we don't actually know what we're measuring but
it should be fairly representative of actual brain activity". But regular
people that have other things to do in their lives don't know that. And if,
somehow, in a weird parallel universe, a particular health policy hinges on
whether LSD makes actual brain connections or "functional connections", then
it'd be damn important for people to know what that actually means.
