---
title: 'Cycles and Subline (11/52)'
tags: [Reflection]
status: publish
type: post
published: true
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2017-03-24-cycles2.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.5)
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/2017-03-24-cycles2.jpg

excerpt: "Am I rooting for the immaculately shaped fireball to
disappear, or to stay? When it does quietly sneak away, though, I feel an even
stranger sense of satisfaction, as if I've experienced the most climatic
finale of a heroic tale."
---
Mar 23, 2017 (For week of Mar 13)

Our hearts beat every second or so, again and again, but those microscopic
loops are unraveled to become a line connecting the previous moment and the
next, making a minute, an hour, a day. From the moment we regain
consciousness, up to the moment we drift off to sleep - day after day - we
slowly crawl forward from one time unit to the next. Our clocks are circular,
perhaps only because it is more mechanically efficient to make them so, since
for us, passage of time through life itself is a journey with a well-defined
direction - forward. If we ever come to know the time of our own demise, or
that of our universe, we will start making clocks that count up, or down,
towards it; I am sure of it.

The day starts and ends with sunrise and sunset, and in between them, a day
becomes a dot in the line connecting months, years. Somehow, we've done an
remarkable job in unfolding cyclic and non-linear processes into a line - such
is the curse of time moving forward, or rather, of how we experience it. But
when I stop to experience the day at these most crucial moments, moments
separating day and night, one dot from the next, time itself seems to suddenly
fill with material, the moment becomes palpable - sublime - out of thin air.
In these brief seconds before the sun falls below the horizon, the sky
explodes with what seems to me like the set of all possible colors, and a
paradox. The paradox is that while the moment itself being so brief, when
measured by the turning across equidistant ticks in our machines, it has never
failed to feel like an eternity. I'm never sure of the theatrics that I'm
watching (or participating in?), or what exactly I'm anticipating, but I'm
anticipating something. Am I rooting for the immaculately shaped fireball to
disappear, or to stay? When it does quietly sneak away, though, I feel an even
stranger sense of satisfaction, as if I've experienced the most climatic
finale of a heroic tale. The story ends, and starts again tomorrow.

![](/assets/images/blog/2017-03-24-cycles1.jpg)

* * *

I don't do this often, but being on the edge of the continent overlooking the
Pacific is a privilege I have learned to not take for granted. But it was only
until very recently did I witness the opposite: the sun peeking through the
emerald surfaces of the Caribbean Sea. Actually, it is the moment itself that
gives the sea its crystalline turquoise. The upside-down birth of the sun
itself gives birth to all that we see. More, in fact, as the golden threads
weaving these clouds only reveal themselves for this tiny moment, and then
they disappear.

And it was in that moment I realized that the story never ends: whenever and
wherever there is a sunset, there is always a sunrise at that exact same
instant for someone else on this Earth. There is no beginning nor end, yet it
always tells a story. Or rather, we always tell a story about it.

![](/assets/images/blog/2017-03-24-cycles2.jpg)
