---
title: ''
categories: []
tags: []
status: draft
type: post
published: false
meta: {}
---

When I first started my PhD 3 years ago, I thought that the brain ultimately
holds all the answers to our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, in that
everything we "do" - consciously or subconsciously, explicitly or internally -
had to have a corresponding neural cause, because ultimately it is our nervous
system that enables us to do what we do. Over time, "cause" tampered into
"correlate", but the idea remained: our cognition should have an exact
counterpart, causal mechanism or simply a mirror image, in the brain. On the
one hand, that seemed obvious: if our brains are ultimately the information
processor and the action initiator, then any human act must be routed through
the brain. On the other hand, that was an assumption, one that is implicit but
fundamental to studying the brain, not just for me, but many others, I
believe. After all, rarely do we ask the question of "is there a neural
correlate of XYZ", but directly skip to "what IS the neural correlate of XYZ",
and when we fail to find it, the paper does not get written, and we chalk it
up to "not looking at the right place". In a sense, this assumption is an
axiom, a fundamental and assumed truth, around which we are building modern
neuroscience, and it has been incredibly successful, as we were able to find
neural correlates of many, many behaviors and general cognitive "states",
ranging from sensory perception, motor action, emotions, and even diseases. In
the last few months, however, I've had several conversations that made me
vaguely rethink this axiom of neuroscience, cumulating to this question: can
we find the neural correlate of a backhand tennis stroke on grass vs. rubber
courts?

A little context: I gave my end of year department talk summarizing my
research over the last 3 years, and I framed it as, ultimately, an attempt to
link neurobiology and behavior through intermediate, mesoscale neural signals
(e.g. local field potentials).

In the last few months, however, I've had several conversations that made me
rethink this axiom of neuroscience, and I will briefly recount two of such
anecdotes below to illustrate how I've arrived at my current predicament.

**Story 1. Functionalism: rocks as complex computational devices**  
There is a prevalent metaphor among neuroscientists and cognitive scientists,
which is that the brain is like a computer in that it receives, stores, and
transforms information. What does that mean? To oversimplify quite a bit, our
computers, for example, receives inputs (commands) from the user through the
keyboard and mouse, interprets those commands within the current context (like
traversing your web browser), and processes/transforms that information
appropriately to make changes on the screen. The information throughout is
encoded as bits - strings of 0s and 1s - represented by the voltages held by
billions of tiny physical transistors in the CPU. In the "brain-is-computer"
metaphor, information is encoded similarly by our biological brain, the
difference simply being that bits are represented by the state of neurons (our
wetware), instead of transistors. Within this framework
("[functionalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functionalism_\(philosophy_of_mind\))"),
our brains perform functions similar to what a computer does (e.g. store
memory, interpret visual/tactile inputs, etc.), just with different physical
implementations. All that is fine and well, and this framing has led to tons
of advances in neuroscience in the last few decades, partly due to the fact
that we had really good mathematical tools to analyze and understand systems
that manipulate and store information in this way. It is also intuitively
appealing: consider, for example, the fact that both birds and planes fly,
i.e. they perform the same function, just with different physical
implementations. Fundamentally, this view sees objects (brains/computers,
birds/planes) as implementations to effectively solve a particular
computational problem (information processing, flying).

Taken to the extreme and away from the brain, however, this conversation
almost always leads to the same ugly question every time I have it: are rocks
sophisticated devices that computes a very difficult physics problem, namely,
what is the trajectory a rock of given size and shape will go through when
thrown with a given velocity and onto a given terrain? Consider another
problem: let's say we are hammering a nail, and a (bored) physicist may sit
down one afternoon and work out the precise velocity the hammerhead travels at
given the force one applies to it. It's not a terribly difficult problem, but
non-trivial and will require at least high-school level physics. But is it
possible that something else could compute the hammer's velocity much faster?
This is precisely what I came across one day, scrolling through Twitter:

> Does the nail compute hammer's speed and encode it in its depth in the wall?
And if not, why not?

>

> — Romain Brette (@RomainBrette) [June 27,
2017](https://twitter.com/RomainBrette/status/879584542213976065)

Indeed, does the nail serve as a computational device that instantaneously
works out the velocity of a hammer and encodes it as its own depth in the
wall? And if it does, doesn't that mean that the rock, too, computes
sophisticated physics problems, and basically every object in this world can
and does serve as some (incredibly niche) computational device?

\- many concepts are social constructs that we may or may not find neural
correlates for

\- functionalism

\- internal (intentional) variables vs. external (objective/measurable?)
variables?

\- movement vs. social disorder

\- fuzzy spectrum

\- similar to gene interactions

\- so neurodynamics is a set of lego blocks that can be used to build and
“represent” different things, possibly with the same set of blocks
(underdetermined)

\- to say there is a neural correlate of everything is to say each individual
brain at any given moment is unique, which means neuroscience is hopeless

\- pragmatically, we can settle on some midpoint: finding the minimal set that
explains the maximal variance in “cognition"

\- what kinds of behaviors/cognitive states ARE most consistently represented?
are they more relevant for one reason or another?

\- we probably need to define some terms better, quantitatively

\- move from “receptive fields” to “feature detectors” - interpreter
independent to dependent

\- requires abstractions/inductive reasoning: time & space invariance,
individual invariance? baggage from physics

