---
title: '12/52: GET OUT'
categories: []
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta: {}
---

March 26, 2017

Obviously, spoiler alert. If you haven't seen Get Out and are intending to see
it, stop reading. If you have (or don't plan on doing so), do continue and let
me know if you took away any of your own metaphors.

**tldr:** watched a horror movie; shattered my sense of identity; can't
imagine the shit black people have to deal with; I will start wearing a
metaphorical tinfoil hat from now on.

![](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_58d8b577ebbd1aac6207ae6b_1490597253848_jordan-
peele.jpg_)

* * *

I don't usually watch horror films, and when I do, I almost never get creeped
out the way they are intended to creep you out. Of course, something suddenly
popping out of the screen gets a nice squirt of adrenaline into my veins, but
afterwards, I never think twice about the movie. I think this is because I'm a
very literal person, and for a horror film to take hold of you after you go
home and make you run up the basement stairs after the lights go off, you have
to buy into the metaphor. Usually, the metaphors themselves are very literal:
a supernatural being is hiding in the dark; a serial murderer is looking for
you; fate has marked your preeminent and violent death. I was baptized in the
church of physics, so ghosts and grungy girls groping me through my television
are more laughable than gruesome; and to not die at the hands of a serial
murderer, just follow your common sense, run the hell out of there, and don't
trip. In short, either I haven't watched a lot of quality horror films (I
haven't), or they're just not my thing - which was why this movie gave me
extra creeps.

To be honest, throughout the film, I thought it was just okay: there were good
comedic moments, and the horror/racial tropes were cringeworthy enough to be
enjoyable. But as a whole, my literalness fixated on the horror being
conducted on screen, namely, white people displacing the souls of black people
and taking over their bodies as their own. Neither the hypnosis nor the
neurosurgery made a drop of sense, and so the whole plot was reduced to a
complicated and farcical story to string together an array of racial jokes, as
a way to flip off well-intending and fully racist white folks alike. Don't get
me wrong, none of that is a bad thing. I can fully get behind ironic and
comedic exposure to the ways minorities are mistreated, but I suppose I was
unsatisfied because the film wasn't any more than watching a bunch of Key and
Peele sketches in one sitting, which, again, while enjoyable, maybe doesn't
deserve its outstanding Rotten Tomato ratings. As Chris is saved by his goofy
friend, my relief for our protagonist is mixed with confusion and
disappointed. Had I just not gotten why everyone loved it so much? Maybe I was
aware enough of the ways black people are (mis)treated to be mildly
entertained as oppose to enlightened? But as the last 10 seconds of the film
unfolded, as said goofy friend backed the car out, the screen fixated on
Chris' face: it wasn't a face of relief, knowing that he had been saved from
the final horror. It was a face of horror itself, of confusion and
uncertainty. And somewhere in that last 10 seconds, it suddenly hit me like a
punch in the face, time stopped and I was suddenly hyper-aware of me and my
surroundings as the lights cut on. I think I got it. Or my version of "it",
whatever it is.

* * *

My family moved from China to our current home of Toronto, Canada in 2002,
when I was a young Chinese boy 11 years of age. Somehow, we stumbled into an
upper-middle class neighborhood around Sheppard and Bayview. (If you don't
know what that's like: we had an upscale mall with no McDonalds but an A&W.)
Of course, we had close to no money (or so I believe, since they never bought
me those goddamn YuGiOh cards), and lived with another Chinese family in an
apartment suite meant for one small family. The adults took up the two
bedrooms, which in my memory was really only big enough for a bed, which I had
to sit on to use the desk because there was no room for an extra chair. The
two boys - me and the other family's son a year older than me - bunked in the
living room. Not as a den-turned-bedroom thing that people living in downtown
condos do now, but just two beds in the living room next to the TV. We had
become familiar with two other Chinese families in the apartment complex and
that, along with our roommate family, was my parents' closest acquaintances
for those couple of years. I write all of this not as a sob story
demonstrating how poor and unprivileged we are, but to say that I had
absolutely no clue any of this was abnormal in any way. Later on in life I
would learn that this is actually a common experience for Asian technology-
immigrant (as opposed to investment) families, but that was not what made the
situation normal for me. For me, it was normal because I was at an age trying
to normalize absolutely everything I could around me.

There are, however, more foreign things that I've normalized and normalized
myself into that I never fully consciously chose. The natural consequence of
living in an upper-middle class neighborhood in Canada was that I lived around
and went to school with predominantly white people. Not hipsters or hippies,
and as far as I can tell, not Canadian rednecks. Just regular, normal white
families in faux-suburbia. I still don't fully understand the struggle to fit
into an entirely different world as a budding teenager or an immigrant, but I
imagine it was pretty confusing, and I was trying to soak up as much white
culture as I could. For whatever reason, I realized that to be accepted in
this new social hierarchy, I had to disassociate myself from friends that are
"too Asian" as well as not act like such myself. There were, of course, Asian
people in the community, but only the westernized Asians had any luck in being
integrated into the vicious world of middle school preteens. And so, I tried
to make white friends, did white people things, liked white girls, and tried
to dress like white boys (who, ironically, at the time, tried to dress like
black rappers - 3XL single-colored t-shirts and pants at the waist.) My
parents probably thought I was messed up, but I think they were just happy
that I got on okay with school. Thinking back, I've made some life-long Asian
friends throughout my life that were "real Asians" deep down but were just as
good at pretending that they were not. In any case, I had always chalked that
weird period up to being a child desperately adjusting to a situation that
would've been formative even for a native child, and while that WAS the
reason, I never really considered the consequence that that served as the
pervasive foundation of my new found identity. Thank god for Tupac and Eminem
for intervening, but that's a story for another day.

* * *

There is an implicit and unwavering certainty in my dedication to studying the
brain from a biological and physiological perspective, which is that I believe
changing any aspect ourselves must first come from, and is a result of, a
change in the physical substrate of our self, the brain. That certainty, while
almost certainly scientifically correct, made me blind to the fact that
changes to the brain and our fundamental identity can occur without
intentionally altering the brain via mechanical (surgery), electrical, or
chemical (drugs) interventions. The magical thing about how we - all organisms
with nervous systems - have evolved is that we are able to receive sensory
stimulus through our eyes and ears and change how our brain is wired without
any conscious intervention. I don't know how, but this was the realization
that came to me in those last 10 seconds of the film, and I suddenly
understood our protagonist's face of horror and uncertainty as a reflection of
the terror that, after having been hypnotized repeatedly, would he ever be the
same person again? The metaphor of the brain surgery and hypnosis-induced
burial of self-identity materialized itself for what it really stood for:
unconscious integration of an external culture into our own identity. Having
the shot of adrenaline definitely amplified this paranoia, but in that moment,
I sat there in the theatre, a single Asian person surrounded by matrices of
white movie-goers on a Saturday night, wondering to myself: who the fuck am I?
And how do I make everybody else **get the fuck out** of my head?

For those last 10 seconds of the film, and the credits afterwards, my face
probably mimicked Chris'. To put it less dramatically, I was scanning through
every single one of my preferences and aversions - food, fashion, music,
values - for the subconscious infiltration of Western (white) culture. To put
it more dramatically, my sense of identity was shattered. After the adrenaline
washed away, I was less paranoid and I could entertain the thought of watching
a TV show or reading the news again, but the question remained: which parts of
my "self" had I unknowingly accepted as my own, subconsciously brainwashed
into buying into? And which, more importantly, at a cost of my previous -
original - cultural identity? That was my interpretation of the metaphor the
film ultimately tries to impress upon us, in addition to, and almost
orthogonal to, the literal racist treatments that black people receive from
suburban white people. What sort of ideologies and qualities had we idolized
without consciously choosing, because the dominant social structure dictates
so? I use "we" very loosely here, because, obviously, I'm not black. In fact,
I won't really talk about the message as it is intended for African Americans,
not because I don't sympathize or think it's important, but because I don't
have the authority or experience to speak on it. I can, however, talk about my
experience as an Asian immigrant. And while there is in no way as complex nor
dark of a [history](http://atlantablackstar.com/2017/03/15/sunken-place-
jordan-peeles-get-reminds-public-education-system/) (or current social and
political climate), I think my experiences were similar in that they were
different from the predominant acceptable way of living life in North America,
if not in the difference itself.

So who am I? Well, I'm not sure. Taken to the extreme, we are of course
(mostly) a sum of our experiences. And while being situated in a Western
culture can immerse us in one set of subconscious routines, our parents,
friends, and people we meet also impart us with their own, sometimes inherited
from THEIR own culture and power structures. The difference is, though, your
parents have your best intentions in mind when teaching you values or how to
represent yourself, and there is usually a rich cultural history behind those
set of customs. The other? Maybe not so much. At the same time, I'm not saying
any single white person is at fault here: not my neighbors and classmates who
acted and dressed a certain way because it was their culture, and not even
those who made fun of mine because it was foreign and different, because
that's what people do. Nonetheless, it shocked me to realize that a lot of
things that I thought were "normal" not because they were, but because of the
environment I was in. I'll give you an example: packing sandwiches for lunch.
My parents were of course perplexed with my request for sandwiches as my lunch
items, instead of leftover rice and vegetables. And I requested them because
that's what "normal" kids did, and if I wanted to be cool, I had to be normal
first, so sandwiches please. I don't even like fucking sandwiches, but to this
day, I still think that's the normal item of choice for lunch. That is, of
course, a harmless example, but there are examples that are not so innocent,
like subconscious values or the way we try to shape our mental and physical
selves. Again, I don't want to do a disservice to the way this film aims to
represent the black struggle, but a simple Googling should suffice your
further curiosities.

* * *

I will end with this, and I will try to not sound like a paranoid conspiracy
theorist: if anyone is concretely at fault here, it is the media. Again, I'm
trying to not sound crazy here, but in my opinion, that is the reason why the
takeover process in the film is completed via sitting in front of the
television, and why Chris was watching TV when his mother died - it's a
metaphor for foregoing his own (root) identity because he was locked into
something that told him what he should be instead. I've understood for some
time now that how media portrays something influences the way we think about
that thing. But last night was really the first time that I had the jarring
realization that the way media portrays something influences the way we ARE,
through influencing how we think about ourselves in relation to what is
portrayed as "normal". This, with full respect to the ways it could be and IS
used to propagate dominance over racial and cultural groups, goes beyond just
that. This is not just a black vs. white people thing, this is those who have
control over content vs. those who don't.

Incredibly, the theme of this movie converged on what we've been experiencing
for the past little while now, with reference to our current political
"situation", that hyper-connectivity benefits those who control the
communication channels the most. I'm an independent content creator and I have
a blog, which means that there probably will be 3 times as many people who
read it than had I not been able to share it on Facebook and Twitter. A step
up, if I were a consumer product conglomerate, I would be able to buy an ad
that lets 1000 times as many people see it by recommending it through Facebook
or Google Ad. But if I was really, really rich, I could, theoretically, tailor
your online experience exactly the way I want to. Post election night, we
focused a lot on "echo chambers" within our own social networks, and that is
obviously one component of the bigger problem. But we can't ignore the fact
that somebody actually has control over this stuff, be it social media or
actual media. Mark Zuckerberg (and his engineers) probably didn't actively
influence the way Facebook bubbles shaped as much as Fox News worked to
actively represent things in a certain light, but that doesn't mean it's less
dangerous. If anything, the amorphous and invisible forces has no one to
answer to and thus has no need for moral judgement.

Like I said, I considered stop watching TV and getting off social media
altogether last night. Now that nerves calmed, I think trying to be more aware
is probably a good first step. Going back to my conflict between being Asian
and white: the infiltration of my mind by invisible social forces is jarring
and unpleasant, and I'm not even that whitewashed. But on the flip side,
mixing of cultures with white people, black and brown people, and other Asian
people is part of what makes being an immigrant life beautiful in its own way
(so says Mei, anyway). For now, I will probably just try to find my roots in
soup dumplings and less tanned skin - fuck, I think Asian people like fair
skin because of Western media influences in Asia.

Alright, tin foil hat back on.

