---
title: 'What is the hardest scientific endeavor of all? (23/52)'
tags: [Neuroscience]
status: publish
type: post
published: true
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-mauisunset.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.2)
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-mauisunset_sq.jpg

excerpt: "We cannot study what we cannot truly see, and can we truly see ourselves?"
---

"The brain is the most complex thing in the universe."

If there was one quote that grinds my gears more than all else, it is this
one. It is simply an idiotic thing to say: the brain is not the most complex
thing in the universe; the universe, which contains billions and billions of
brains small and big, is the most complex thing in the universe. Even the
interaction between two brains, certainly, is more complex than the brain
itself. So why is neuroscience, the scientific study of the brain, the hardest
of all?

Let's take, as two examples, quantum physics and astrophysics, fields that
study the tiniest and the grandest objects in our universe. These are
extremely difficult things to study, because to even observe the signals
necessary to start answering the questions we've set forth, it takes some real
human ingenuity and delicate engineering to construct devices that can give us
reliable measurements we can then use to make inferences. Watch this really
great [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iphcyNWFD10) on LIGO and the
detection of gravitational waves if you are not convinced, and coincidentally,
it is a combination of both quantum physics and astrophysics (4:45 is the best
part...why are they even wearing goggles?)

If that's not the craziest thing I've heard of, which is literally at the
physical boundary of the universe (as we understand today) on both the
smallest and the largest scales, I don't know what is. Maybe putting people on
Mars? Maybe Elon Musk's new brain hat? Which brings me to how much more
difficult neuroscience is. Actually, it's not just neuroscience, it's all
scientific efforts that try to study some aspect of the human mind, like
psychology and cognitive science, but not, for example, neurobiology. And the
reason I believe this is not because neuroscience is intrinsically hard - it
most certainly pales in comparison to many branches of the physical and even
social sciences.

What makes it hard, I think, is that it is incredibly difficult for a human to
be objective when we study the brain and the mind: the phenomena we are
interested in explaining are the ones that occur on a daily basis in our
mundane lives, like paying attention to traffic, perceiving color, etc, and it
is precisely these subjective experiences that we not only draw inspiration
from, but also try to dissect as if they are objective things in the universe.
I certainly don't want to get into the debate of what is and what is not
objectively real, a photon or consciousness, but I think we can agree that one
is more objectively existing than the other, at least in terms of how we
operationalize them scientifically. In fact, I think the more "dead" we think
something is, the easier it is to study it objectively, which might explain
the incredible disparity in our level of understanding of the brain compared
to every other organ in our body. When we study the brain and the mind,
confirmation bias does not only creep in at the objective scientific level,
but the personal level as well. Yes, we can be diligent in checking results
that confirm our hypotheses, but it is damn near impossible to be diligent in
checking results that are consistent with our daily experiences and intuition.
After all, if I've had these experiences, it must be the right, right?

Why is it so hard? I'm not sure, but if I were to venture a guess, I think it
is rooted in our wish to preserve our own identities, livingness, and
humanness. One of the things that makes us humans feel special is the belief
that we are special: yes, dogs and cows and rats and dolphins all have brains,
but we must be special in some way? And if we were to lose this feeling of
specialness in the pursuit of an objective understanding of the brain and our
humanness, we would paradoxically lose this humanness altogether. In fact, I
believe it is crucial that we treat the human brain like we treat any other
organism on this planet in order to properly study it, but that would create
such an intense dissonance, because at the end of the day, when we're done
being neuroscientists, we're back to being regular people - a friend, a
spouse, a parent - all of which requires this special humanness to maintain,
this special belief that we're all the good guys at the end of the day.

I recently finished reading Paul Kalanithi's When Breath Becomes Air, and his
story contextualized our scientific effort in understanding the brain in a way
that's never explicitly occurred to me before - though I soon realized
afterwards that it's always been an implicit motivation for me, and perhaps
for many others - and that is the search for meaning. I believed that we can
ultimately objectively define the meaning of our existence by understanding
the brain, the organ that presumably gives us this sense of meaning - our
joys, pains, struggles, triumphs, and every other thing we feel - in the first
place. Now that I consciously think about it, I don't know whether this will
ever happen: to objectively understand this sense of meaning, we may have to
give up that there is any meaning in the first place, and simply describe our
thoughts, movements, and interactions as physical quantities changing over
time, like how we objectively describe ant colonies, economics, and a
[murmuration of birds](https://www.wired.com/2011/11/starling-flock/).
