---
title: '8/52: Science as a belief system.'
categories: []
tags: []
status: publish
type: post
published: true
meta:
  _thumbnail_id: '74'
---

Feb 26, 2017

Disclaimer  
Before I get on with the post, I have to make known that I think the
scientific process is one of the most valuable tools we have as humanity, and
that I am (obviously) not anti-science, nor am I anti-vaccination or anti-
climate change. The following is simply a thought exercise that aims to
examine my own belief system, as well as an attempt to draw some insight in
the way we maintain knowledge about the world. Given the current political
climate, it may be untimely to write something that presents itself as
anything other than throwing my full weight behind science. But that is
precisely what I'm doing: improving the way we think about, and communicate to
others, the truth about how science works.

* * *

First, I think it's useful to distinguish the two meanings we invoke when we
say "science". First and foremost, science is a method (or process) that
iteratively attempts to converge on fundamental and useful descriptions of the
world we live in, be it in physics, biology, or economics. It's making
assumptions, gathering evidence, and re-examining the assumptions if anything
surprising is observed. On the other hand, "science" also describes the body
of knowledge gathered thus far via the scientific process, sometimes known as
scientific truths or facts. This is a body of knowledge that has allowed us to
make tremendous modern advances via engineering and medicine - applied
sciences. By analogy, the former science is the method by which you build a
house, from foundation to rooftop, and the latter is simply the house that was
created in the process. The process itself is not attached to the resulting
product, ideally at least. In fact, the fundamental principle of the
scientific process, in a way, tries to rip down the house as it is being
built, with the hopes of building another one with much studier foundations.
The distinction between the two took me many years and many contentious
conversations with friendly people to figure out, but I think I've finally
converged on how to express what I think the problem is properly.

Science, as a body of knowledge, needs to be communicated. Consider how most
of us acquire scientific knowledge about the world nowadays: we have science
classes in high school, and if you were so inclined, you could take science
courses in university or college as well. What about in areas outside of your
concentration, and after you graduate? Unless you pursue a graduate degree in
science itself, it is most likely that your formal science education ends
there, and anything you learn moving forward comes from secondary sources,
such as magazines, news/internet articles, or even word of mouth. After all, I
don't think many of us gather our beliefs from primary research articles, nor
should we be required to in order to "learn" or "understand" something.
Nevertheless, many of us have learnt to build a belief system on the
foundations of scientific facts - not the process itself, but the knowledge
acquired. Common examples: the Earth is round and revolves around the Sun,
gravity is an universal force, medicine works better than prayers.

Now, it might seem inconceivable, but we could replace that foundation with
any other body of knowledge, be it folk wisdom, anecdotal stories, or
religious teachings. In fact, I am under the impression that, as a body of
knowledge, facts about God and religion-guided moral codes were transmitted in
very similar ways prior to the last few decades, and it has only been recently
that scientific facts have replaced religious facts as the common belief
system. Note that I am not drawing an equivalence between scientific facts and
religious "facts". Obviously, the process in which we generate scientific
facts is tied very closely to the scientific process, which is fundamentally
different from how religious facts are generated. Nor am I saying that
religious ideas have no place in our society - quite the contrary, when used
effectively, it is an excellent tool in building our human community. What I
am saying, however, is that when removed from the process, or the context, of
the fact-generating mechanism itself, scientific truth is just a set of belief
system that can be easily exchanged with another, and that is the way it is
most commonly portrayed in popular media: facts first and only, with little to
no mention of the scientific context - history and process - in which the
facts are generated. A simple way to test this is to ask yourself the
following: take some scientific facts in a field unfamiliar to you, by which I
mean that it was not your primary major in college, and think about why you
believe what you believe, and why not the contrary. Why DO you believe the
Earth is round? Or that evolution is real? Or that consuming fat is bad for
you? More importantly, what are the alternative hypotheses and why are those
invalid?

![Image from
Wikipedia](/squarespace_images/static_5351781ce4b0757a373c3d73_535182ade4b0bcfb2b4574dd_58b3479f15d5dbf879cde2b2_1488144314461__img.png_)
Image from Wikipedia

I raise these issues not to cast a shadow of doubt on their scientific merit,
but to simply illustrate a point, which is that I personally, and I think many
of us, hold scientific beliefs in the same way I hold many other everyday
beliefs: I simply accept them to be true in good faith. Of course, the
**crucial** difference between scientific and folk wisdom beliefs is that had
I ever had any doubt on the truthfulness of a scientific finding, I could have
looked up the original, peer-reviewed, research report(s). Although, having
the ability to do so does not equate to having done so, and one important
thing to keep in mind is that even having the thought of accessing primary
research articles is outside the scope of many people in this country, much
less having the means and skills to do so (e.g., keyword searches, getting
through paywall).

With that setup, I am ready to state the problem: I think how we communicate
the body of scientific knowledge directly contributed to the predicament we
currently find ourselves in, namely, anti-science and post-truth. Science
education in schools and popular media largely ignore the philosophy of
science and how the process itself is a process of elimination. At best, when
it is mentioned, it's casted as a fact-finding process, not a hypothesis-
eliminating process. This is a subtle but very important difference: fact-
finding tries to find observations to support a claim, while hypothesis-
elimination tries to find observations to disprove a claim until none other is
deemed satisfactory - and I must say, even scientists (myself included) get
those two mixed up sometimes. Without informed opinion about how science as a
process works, we do not have the context to properly and **critically**
evaluate facts generated by it, and so, removed from the source, it is just
another belief system. Naturally, then, we should face resistance from those
that were not brought up with the same belief system. The key is that, an
understanding of the scientific process allows you to see that this particular
belief system is open to edits in an attempt to converge on the truth - often
in non-linear trajectories and with significant setbacks. But without it, it
just looks like whoever is making up these facts screws up a lot. The whole
Andrew Wakefield vaccine debacle, for the scientific community, is an
affirmation to the process itself, that we eventually **will** erase false
knowledge through group effort. But without understanding the process, it is
confirmation that scientists can't make up their minds. Are vaccines really
okay or not? Are carbs healthy for you or not? Is the climate really changing
if there is still some 1% of so-called "scientists" that deny it? How CAN we
make those calls without understanding the social, cultural, and economical
motives that drive, not only corporate scientists, but all scientists?

So we have multiple belief systems that are now judged to be equivalent,
though one is methodologically more trustworthy than the rest (for a
particular area of knowledge, at least). That is the problem, and what can we
do about it now? Well, I don't think I'm saying anything that somebody
somewhere hasn't said about science education, but it's important enough to
keep repeating it: we need to focus more on the process, and not the facts.
It's a lot of fun to watch a well-made YouTube video or well-written blog
article talking about new scientific findings, but that cannot be the only
thing. We have to educate people about the fact that this belief system that
we call science is not like other belief systems, and it's founded on a
rigorous set of principles that anybody can apply to generate new knowledge,
not just scientists. There are professional scientists, and there are
backyard/kitchen/[everyday
scientists](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GpWQHFzrEqc). The facts are almost
secondary: give a man a fish, feed him for a day; teach a man how to fish,
feed him for a life. We need to educate people on how to look at a news
article, be it scientific or world events, progressive or conservative, and be
able to apply for themselves the hypothesis-eliminating procedure, instead of
taking the information as is. The current information technology
infrastructure in the form of social media and internet as a whole makes that
a really hard thing to do: after all, who has the energy to rethink every
piece of "information" they receive on Twitter or Facebook or Buzzfeed or what
have you? I don't know what the solution to this bigger problem is, but I
think emphasizing on disseminating information about the process itself is a
good start.

* * *

Addendum: this took me several weeks of hand-wringing to figure out how to
convey the message properly. I'm not 100% satisfied, but it's good enough for
now. Thank you to everyone that had this conversation with me, all of those
helped in distilling the difference between the process and the body of
knowledge that is science. I remember the first time I had this thought was
maybe about 4 years ago, and I probably blurted out something to my roommates
like "guys, is science really different from religion?" I hope the answer is
clear from the above. I am very interested in hearing about how most of you
think about this framing, since most people that read my shit are science
advocates, or at least pro-science. I also wonder if anyone on the other side
can relate a bit better to this framing, instead of the usual "science is good
for you and that's that".
