---
layout: single
title: "First post!"
published: true
date: 2018-02-10 00:01:15 -0500



author_profile: true
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/teaser_placeholder.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(255,0,0,0.5)
  #cta_label: "OMGCLICKME"
  #cta_url: "https://unsplash.com"


#classes:
  #- wide
  #- landing
  #- dark-theme

sidebar:
  nav: "docs"
  #- title: "WHOOOA"
#    image: /assets/images/teaser_placeholder.jpg

# table of contents stuff
#toc: true
#toc_label: "table of contents" # set default in _data/ui-text
#toc_icon: bolt #https://fontawesome.com/icons?d=gallery&s=solid&m=free

excerpt: "First post on the new Jekyll-based website!"
---

Hi, my name is Bob.

# bold testing #


what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al. what is going on I don't know markdown et al.
