---
title: 'Our thin layer of existence. (26/52)'
tags: [Travels]
status: publish
type: posts
published: false
categories: []
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-mauisunset.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.2)
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-mauisunset_sq.jpg

excerpt: "Hawaii was truly an eye-opening and life-changing experience."

permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/

gallery_crater:
  - url: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-crater.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/blog/thumbnail/2017-10-16-hawaii-crater.jpg  
  - url: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-infinitystone.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/blog/thumbnail/2017-10-16-hawaii-infinitystone.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-craternight.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/blog/thumbnail/2017-10-16-hawaii-craternight.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-dragonmei.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/blog/thumbnail/2017-10-16-hawaii-dragonmei.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-meditate.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/blog/thumbnail/2017-10-16-hawaii-meditate.jpg
  - url: /assets/images/blog/2017-10-16-hawaii-freshlava.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/blog/thumbnail/2017-10-16-hawaii-freshlava.jpg
---

Mar 6, 6:47pm: Lisbon, Miradora
Sitting atop one of the "7 hills" grants me a feeling of majestic solitude. The spring breeze is not unfriendly, but just __ enough to tell you that this is stilla world on Earth and that you cannot bask in this storybook view forever because it's too chilly and your hands will get numb.

The bustling of the city can only be __ imagined, or vaguely remembered, from 15 min ago before what seems like a straight vertical hike through city streets. The colorful houses and maroon roofs both inform you and hides the fact that there is, indeed, a ton of life in these narrow hidden streets.

Looking directly across, you're eye to eye with Christos illunimated - only you two, face to face, surveying this city, then each other. At dusk, the colors are quickly covered and the street lamps come on to illuminate the hidden paths and family dinners. The sound of the trolley bell can be heard from almost everywhere, even this high up. You truly can see and hear everything, but you cannot, at the same time. It is a world removed.

The painted houses are like the lego creation of a disorganized librarian, scattered everywhere but just in their rightful place. It's functionally chaotic. Couples and view finders sit on the marble benches drinking casual beers. My phone is on 3% and I worry I will not be able to find my way down the way I came, and even if I did, the steps are perilous and sharp in the dark, the single file streets are narrow and consuming.

7:11pm
The church bells are rushing me to leave, but I'm desperately holding on for the city to reveal more of itself as the street lamps come on and the sun light fades. Once I turn my back, it will be hard to say my exact elevation.

The view from atop is not unlike the view of the floor tiles on every street.

I am lost but I know that the city will open its arms to me if I were just to ask. The bridge is illuminated path to Cristo, and the gaunt looking castle is its antithesis, even though its also lit up. Its a drama. The Targus river disappears and blends into the hills under Cristos, the bridge becomes a crossing over darkness.

8:52pm
Night time washes away all colorful houses and replaces it with a golden hue. On absolutely everything. On a portion of the way down, there is a flight of stairs. It pleases me that there were exactly 171 flights.

It's a place where you can just walk around and bump into things to see, do, and eat. Someone called me Jackie Chan tho still. I actually stumbled into chinatown/foreigner block/indian/africa/middle eastern restos. and its clearly very segregated. The city looks old, historical, and just plain old, but it doesn't feel shady

Are the stories I tell about the city, about the city, or about me?

I've been kinda frustrated at myself this whole trip. First it's being annoyed that I didnt have time to prep for it cuz I was working till so last minute, on a grant that we didn't end up getting, forgetting the adapter, didnt look for places to visit, didnt even look at portugeuse phrases. I might as well have gone to fucking Utah and I would have been none the wiser. Then missing the castle hours twice, losing my jacket (how?), sunglasses, and almost a bunch of other stuff.

Mar 8, 2019
It's a magic moment when the disparate places meld into a coherent picture, like puzzles fitting together. Only then did I truly appreciate just **how much** there is in Lisbon that's packed into so little. I feel like I can keep exploring for weeks and find cool things all the time.

Sintra - expecting tranquility, giving up and getting lost. Having expectations on something I didnt really plan well nor execute really detracts from the experience, whereas just accepting that I didnt and go where the wind takes me is much more enjoyable. My last meal was butter chicken at an indian restaurant.

{% include gallery id="gallery_crater" caption="The young Earth rages on."%}
