---
title: 'COSYNE 2022'
tags: [General Science, Reflections, Science Communication]
status: publish
type: post
published: False
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/2022-03-28-cosyne22.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.8)
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/2022-03-28-cosyne22.jpg
classes:
  - wide

toc: true
toc_label: "outline"
toc_icon: "space-shuttle"

permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/

excerpt: ""
---

At the risk of trying to replicate my own success (but also to revive this blog), I will attempt to summarize some of my own takeaways after attending Cosyne 2022. Off the bat, I can tell you that it won't be as comprehensive as the 2019 post. One simple reason for that is just that I didn't go to as many of the talks (lol), so the coverage will not be nearly as comprehensive. In fact, you should by no means read this as an "objective" survey of the topics and trends at the conference, but rather views through a very filtered lens. This is not _just_ a product of my laziness and skipping talks, though. I'll try to convince you later that this was (at least in part) by design. But also, in the 3 years since Cosyne 2019, a lot of things have changed. While the scientific community is still struggling to claw back towards some kind of in-person normalcy, the upside is that most of the conference material exists online in one form or another, even the poster. More importantly, they exist in a systematically-curated and accessible form, in no small part thanks to efforts from the [organizers][yt_cosyne], but also to community-driven initiatives (like [World Wide Neuron][wwn_virtual]) and crazy [individual efforts][tw_talukder], for making such resources available.

The biggest difference between 2019 and 2022, though, is that I'm 3 years older, having existed as a fly on the Cosyne auditorium wall for 3 years longer, and somehow finding myself to be partially integrated into this community. Actually, in true, unbashful, senior(er) academic fashion, I'm going to tell you that the most interesting thing I took away this year was in fact this particular piece of "meta-perspective", and it manifests in several concrete ways:

First, my view of the science that was presented at the conference is now less of a point observation, but one of a noisy trajectory or derivative. Of course, this is something the organizers needed to be aware of in constructing the conference program, and it shows up implicitly in the reviewer biases in which abstracts were accepted (in terms of what's "in" and "out"). I'm sure they talked about what their intentions were at some point, but I somehow managed to miss the opening talk. In any case, I will raise the disclaimer again that this in no way represents a "true" reflection of the conference themes, but my filtered version, so I will only highlight and comment on a few of my personal favorites in Section I.

Second, beyond passively participating in the conference program, I had the good fortune to actively shape a small part of it by co-organizing a workshop with [Roxana Zeraati][tw_zeraati] on neuronal timescales, along with a line-up of fantastic speakers (and cool people). This was obviously a stressful and intense experience, especially on the day of, but it was also exhilarting and insanely productive scientifically. Not only that, I felt like I was able to connect with the people there—_as human beings_—in a much deeper way than I was able to while just chatting at a poster, or casually meeting up as a part of socializing at the conference, especially being a relatively introverted person. In Section II, I will give a brief report of the discussions we had on __"Mechanisms, functions, and methods for diversity of neuronal and network timescales"__, as well as some reflections about my experience as a workshop co-organizer and participant.

Lastly, after 7 years of going to conferences, it finally occured to me in Lisbon that I don't (explicitly) know _how to conference_. There are a lot of conventional wisdoms floating around about how to do conferences, and sometimes specific instructions for specific conferences, most of which about prioritizing watching talks vs. going to posters vs. socializing. A lot of it is helpful, but I think it dawned on me that nobody really ever gave me _systematic_ instructions on **how** to conference, and that probably most people didn't get this as a part of how-to-science manual either. What made me realize this in the first place: that walking around, how my environment interacted with me as a 30-year old postdoc was a lot different than a 27-year old grad student, and so maybe I should approach my environment differently as well? In the last section, I will continue to not give instructions, because there are no one-size-fit-all advice: it's different for different people, at different conferences, and most importantly, at different stages of career. At the same time, lots of people share the feeling that conferences are overwhelming, exhausting, and guilt-inducing. Instead, I will write a bit about this realization, and make some _meta-suggestions_ for how to conference—__in particular, setting goals that are appropriate for your interests, career stage, and personality.__

---
# Section I. Science Highlights
I took notes for some talks and posters. They're not very good notes. To be honest I'm not even 100% confident I left with the correct takeaways, so please feel free to correct me if I misrepresented something. This is partially due to my lack of attention span, but also speaks to the incredible volume of cool works at Cosyne. Actually, a conference like this is really difficult because everything looks interesting and at least tangentially relevant to the broader theme of neural dynamics and computations (at Cosyne? wow dude who would've thought). In the end, instead of _a priori_ choosing what's relevant for me personally, I've basically given up, and instead rely on _learning_ about what interests me the most after the fact, based on which of the talks I happened to be at that inspired the most thoughts. They mostly fell into the following categories (though I had to do some shoe-horning for some):

### I love "weird" stuff
Hands down, what I enjoyed the most are talks that are quite different from the "classical" Cosyne stuff, and I'm very grateful that the organizers decided to include a broader set of topics for the talks. Nothing against PCAs & ANNs, it's just that the bandwidth (i.e., new information per minute) is much higher for talks on weird stuff I've never thought about before. I guess I enjoy the feeling of hearing about ideas that could fundamentally change how I think about something, or just ideas that are so completely unfamiliar to me, that it triggers a novelty reward. Of these, I want to highlight 2 talks and a poster:

[Asya Rolls][link_rolls] talked about the similarities and differences between the nervous system and the immune system, how they both make "memories", and how memories in these two systems interact. She showed results from some super interesting experiments, and her talk is [online][yt_rolls], I highly recommend checking it out because it's quite accessible as an outsider to immunology. In a nutshell, these two systems face similar environmental demands, in that they have to adapt to novel situations, especially situations where remembering how to optimally act might save your life the next time around (think a tiger vs. a novel pathogen). Like a lot of people, I got my Immunology degree from Twitter after COVID vaccines dropped, but never did I think about how the brain might be involved in the immune response (the one thing I study that is suppose to "remember" stuff). Among their crazy results: chemogenetic activation (via DREADD) of dopaminergic neurons in the VTA leads to a more potent lymphocyte response, which (I think shown in a separate experiment) can trigger a pathway through the bone marrow (?!?), resulting in proliferation of cells that can kill tumor cells more effectively after VTA activation. In plain English: when your reward system is activated in coincidence with an immune response to a foreign pathogen, the immune response is stronger next time. On the flip side, you could have an allergic reaction (which is a "rogue" immune response) upon holding fake flowers if you have an allergy to real flowers, just because your brain recognizes it. A quite relevant example is "phantom COVID symptoms", where knowing somebody who you were in contact with that tests positive will immediately make your throat tingle (though no causal claims are made with respect to this)—this literally happens to me every other week. Lastly, they show that this neuro-immune link is quite specific, where ensembles of neurons in the insular cortex (or, insula) that were active during initial infection can trigger a similar immune response when artificially activated, but not via non-specific activation of neurons across the insula. This is literally the insular analog of memory engrams in the hippocampus and amygdala (see [Josselyn 2020][josselyn_2020], shoutout to the 6ix). This really brought home the message for me that we should rethink what "placebo" means, because anything that the brain "sees"—or "thinks it sees"—could cause a very real bodily response, and her talk showed the extent to which this is true.




[link_rolls]: https://rolls.net.technion.ac.il/
[yt_rolls]:https://youtu.be/-7gNchGxI9s?t=614
[josselyn_2020]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7577560/

### Neural Manifolds Plus (TM)

### Unstructured behavior

### Moar humans

### Mechanism AND Computations

### Timescales, oscillations & mechanistic modeling

### DEI discussions

### Snazzy presentations & broader representations




[yt_cosyne]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCzOTbZTHTubFNjANAR33AAg
[wwn_virtual]: https://www.world-wide.org/cosyne-22/
[tw_talukder]: https://twitter.com/SaberaTalukder/status/1507183050177884162?s=20&t=K17HvJ49jTwOujZuVSzuqA
[tw_zeraati]: https://twitter.com/roxana_zeraati

---
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/eSRNzNF9rgM" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>