---
title: 'The Year is 2023'
tags: [Reflections, General Science, Science Communication, Data & Technology]
status: publish
type: post
published: False
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg
  overlay_filter: rgba(0,0,0,0.7)
  teaser: /assets/images/blog/default_header.jpg
classes:
  - wide
permalink: /blog/:year/:month/:day/

excerpt: ""
---
Goddamnit the year flies by so quickly, and all of a sudden I'm now finding myself scrambling to write something 6 hours before 2024 just so I don't end up with a goose egg for 2023, which, amazingly, has never happened before since I started maintaining this blog in 2014...a solid 10 years ago! To be fair, I have tons of drafts in the cabinets, but that's a story for next year (like the years past).

I've been wanting to write down some thoughts on this particular topic for a while now, and today is as good as any:

**What happens to neuroscience in this new age of Artificial Intelligence?**

I started 2023 learning how to talk to ChatGPT like your local grandpa. Slowly, I was able to integrate it into my daily workflow for mundane little tasks like writing for-loops in a shell script. Then, as I started relying on Co-Pilot in VSCode, and later gave in to shelling out 20 bucks a month for GPT4, whether or not I believe A(G)I is coming, I no longer could laugh off the fact that AI is impacting our lives in very tangible ways, and in particular, my life as a computational neuroscientist. Really, for what it feels like the first time in a long time, AI is making a concrete daily impact, and it's here to stay.

But it's not just its utility as a tool, and obviously I'm not the first one to notice or comment on this. This year, we saw "NeuroAI" really coming into its own as a budding subfield, with a kind of "declaration of independence" [position paper][perspective] authored by some of the biggest who's-whos in computational neuroscience and machine learning, as well as the exploding uptake of [excellently curated resources][neurips_mineault] cataloguing the breakout of NeuroAI onto premier ML/AI conferences.

Fitting enough, NeurIPS---`Neural Information Processing Systems`---was arguably the modern ancestor conference for NeuroAI ("modern" because it came after "cybernetics", which was too...Soviet Union to catch on?). NeurIPS was a place for works looking at how information processing or computation happens in neural and neural-like systems, before weirdly finding itself being **the** place for completely brain-free machine learning papers for some time. Now, in 2024, as the economy goes to shit and big tech companies no longer giving 6-figure salaries to anybody that's ever written a line of `loss.backward()`, maybe we will see NeurIPS coming back to being the playground of computer neuroscientists? If the trend from this year holds up, we'll have gone full circle and come back to analyzing powerful-for-its-time artificial computing systems as we imagine how brains do things, or even as artificial brains, and this, my friends, is a tale as old as time itself. 

But if history serves us correctly, this will not be how we solve neuroscience. Or at least, this alone will not be the way. Strangely enough, I'm convinced of this after being at NeurIPS---and after visiting the Deutsches Museum and playing with some really fun fundamental physics demos--- We need an AI4Neuroscience. 

Computational neuroscience
the method becomes the model
measurements


 (no, the "neurons" in a deep neural network are not neural and we're not having this discussion here)


---
[perspective]:https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-023-37180-x
[neurips_mineault]:https://airtable.com/appWMCgd7CqsVIRza/shrTRBBqmrT74fZLb/tbl1t9cr5qpkYsrpb